origination_name	Qid	unittitle	bioghist	Column 4	Column 5	Column 6	Column 7	Column 8	Column 9	Column 10	Column 11	Column 12	Column 13	Column 14	Column 15	Column 16	Column 17	Column 18	Column 19	Column 20	Column 21
AFL-CIO. Region No. 9		AFL-CIO Region 9 records	"After the 1955 merger of the American Federation of Labor and the Congress of Industrial Organizations, the national AFL-CIO implemented a regional system to communicate and coordinate with state and local labor councils. Since 1955, the regional system has been restructured several times. For the purposes of this collection, AFL-CIO Region 9 refers to the representative of the national AFL-CIO in the Pacific Northwest from 1986 to 1996. Located in Seattle, the office is now defunct, its former jurisdiction encompassed: Alaska, Idaho, Montana, Oregon and Washington. In 1996-1997, these areas were merged within new AFL-CIO regional office structure and placed under Western Region Office, in San Francisco, CA.

From 1986 until 1994, Region 9 was directed by Edward Collins. Previously, Collins had overseen the Region 6 office in San Francisco. David Gregory succeeded Collins in 1994. After the reorganization Gregory served as Regional Political Coordinator.

Due to the restructuring of the regional system this collection contains materials from AFL-CIO Region 21 (1955-1974) and AFL-CIO Region 6 (1974-1986). The AFL-CIO Region 21 office was located in Portland, Oregon and directed by Chester C. Dunsten (1956-1964), Claude Shaffer (1964-1965), and James J. Leary (1965-1974). The AFL-CIO Region 6 office was located in San Francisco and directed by William L. Gilbert (1974-1977), Charles Hogan (1977-1981), James Baker (1981-1983), and Edward J. Collins (1983-1986)."																		
King County Labor Council	Q6411389	King County Labor Council records	"The King County Labor Council has long been the communal decision-making body of the various union locals in King County. From the mid-1920s until the reunification of the AFL and CIO in 1955, only AFL-affiliated unions were represented on the Council. At other times, however, the vast majority of King County's locals had a voice on the Council.

The Council has passed through at least four distinct periods in its history. The Council originally began in 1888 as the Western Central Labor Union. This body changed its name to the Central Labor Council of Seattle and Vicinity in 1905. These groups occasionally joined coalitions with Populists and other reform groups in local and state politics. Nonetheless, much of the early Council's energy was spent simply trying to survive. The second phase of the Council's history began roughly in 1914 with the labor shortage that allowed unions to organize much of Seattle. The Council grew increasingly radical in this period and became the dominant force in Seattle's powerful progressive coalition. The loss of the Council's power began with the mass layoffs of shipyard workers after World War I. These layoffs led the Council to call the Seattle General Strike of 1919, the only truly city-wide general strike in American history. Employers responded to the failed strike with an open shop drive that de-unionized most of King County. A series of internal power struggles plagued the Council after the strike. The Council voted to expel members of the Industrial Workers of the World in late 1919 and Communist Party members in 1925.

The growing conservative influence in the Council was solidified when Dave Beck and his Teamsters came to dominate the group in the late 1920s. The third phase of the Council's history was thus business unionism, Beck-style. Dave Beck began his career as a driver for the Council's cooperative laundry but rapidly rose to become the chief Teamster organizer west of the Rockies. Beck used the strategic position of truck drivers in the economy to start rebuilding the strength of organized labor in Seattle. If the Council declared a firm to be ""unfair to labor,"" he could often prevent the firm from trucking its goods to market. Despite Beck's occasionally ruthless tactics, he believed that businesses had a right to make a profit. When the Great Depression spurred widespread organizing drives, many firms concluded that they would much rather deal with the avowedly anti-radical Beck than with a CIO union. The Council routinely backed Beck in his jurisdictional disputes with CIO and independent unions. Thus, by the end of World War II, Seattle was largely a closed-shop AFL town. Under Beck's reign, the Council stayed fairly aloof from politics, endorsing moderate pro-labor Democrats and spurning the leftist coalitions that fought for local and state offices.

The fourth stage of the Council's history, its reentry into local politics, began with the merger of the AFL and CIO in 1955. The expanded Council was quickly put on the defensive by statewide right-to-work proposals in Initiative 198 in 1956 and Initiative 202 in 1958. The Council played a leading role in the campaigns that defeated these measures. After these victories, the Council went on the offensive. It started a pro-labor public relations campaign in 1959 that included donating money to charities and promoting radio and television appearances by labor leaders. Beginning in 1964, the Council's Committee on Political Education launched major voter registration drives before elections. The growth of public sector unions in the 1950s and 1960s, coupled with the addition of progressive CIO unions, led the Council to endorse expanded social services and public housing in this period. The Council also supported the efforts of Seattle civil rights groups during the 1960s. Nonetheless, the Council retained some traces of business unionism. It gave a no-strike pledge during the 1962 World's Fair and often helped the Chamber of Commerce lobby for subsidies for local businesses.

During the latter years of the 20th century, the period documented in Accession 1940-2, the council's executive secretaries were, in succession: James K. Bender, Dan Bickford, Ron Judd, and Steve Williamson.

In 2005, the name changed to Martin Luther King County Labor Council, commonly referred to as MLK Labor."																		
Washington State Labor Council	Q7972255	"AFL-CIO, Washington State Labor Council records"	"The Washington State Labor Council (WSLC) was formed in 1957 by a merger of the Washington State Federation of Labor and the Washington State CIO Council. These two labor bodies had been bitter rivals in the 1930s but had slowly grown closer together. The need to cooperate to defeat right-to-work measures (Initiative 198 in 1956 and Initiative 202 in 1958) cemented their alliance. After defeating these measures, labor groups took the offensive. The United Labor Lobby (ULL), which grew out of the committees created to defeat the right-to-work initiatives, won an extension of the 40 hour maximum work week to all Washington workers and an expansion of the unemployment insurance system in 1959. The ULL and WSLC were not able to follow up on these victories in the early 1960s as the increasingly Republican state legislature soon forced labor back on the defensive.

When Evan (Ed) Weston retired as WSLC president in 1961, Joe Davis was elected president. Davis beefed up the Council’s voter registration and get-out-the-vote drives. In 1966 Davis launched a major new effort, dubbed Project ‘66, to increase labor’s influence and broaden its political agenda. Project ‘66 increased the amount of money that member unions paid to the Council and doubled the Council’s staff. These changes allowed the Council to monitor government agencies more closely and to lobby on new subjects of legislative interest, such as tax reform and consumer protection. The new program did score a few notable victories. The WSLC increased its influence in the Washington Department of Labor and Industries. The Council also won limited collective bargaining rights for public employees in 1967, broadened the workers’ compensation program to include essentially all workers in 1971, provided assistance to efforts to pass civil rights laws in the 1960s, and was instrumental in obtaining several consumer protection laws in the 1970s. Project ‘66 thus increased the number of issues on which the Council had legislative influence and built greater cooperation between labor, civil rights, and consumer protection groups. Nonetheless, the WSLC did not substantially increase its ability to elect labor-friendly candidates to the legislature. As such, labor remained vulnerable to lobbying assaults from employer groups throughout the 1970s and 1980s, suffering occasional defeats in struggles over the workers’ compensation and unemployment programs.

The following people served as officers and staff (WSLC): Evan (Ed) Weston, president, 1957-1961; Joe Davis, president, 1962-1980; Marvin Williams, secretary-treasurer, 1959-1980, president, 1985-1993; Lawrence Kenney, research director, 1969-1980, secretary-treasurer, 1980-1985, president, 1985-1993; Louis O. Stewart, education director, 1967-1982."																		
A. Philip Randolph Institute. Seattle Chapter		"A. Philip Randolph Institute, Seattle Chapter records"	"The national A. Philip Randolph Institute was co-founded in 1965 by A. Philip Randolph and Bayard Rustin, in 1965 to forge an alliance between the civil rights movement and the labor movement. APRI is now an American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations constituency group, representing black trade unionists within the AFL-CIO. APRI-Seattle Chapter is dedicated to developing programs that will ""extend democracy to those who have been traditionally disfranchised or discouraged from participating in the political system, strengthening political alliances needed to assure democratic social change and projecting social and economic programs that will improve the lives of all Americans."""																		
(No origination name found.)		John Ahlquist and Margaret Levi research materials for the book 	"John Ahlquist and Margaret Levi are authors of the book 

In the book, John Ahlquist and Margaret Levi systematically compare and document eighty years of union social activism by the International Longshore and Warehouse Union (ILWU) in the United States and the Waterside Workers Federation (WWF) in Australia. They compare the ILWU and WWF to the Teamsters and the International Longshoremen's Association, two American transport industry labor unions that actively discouraged the pursuit of political causes unrelated to their own economic interests.

John S. Ahlquist is the Trice Family Faculty Scholar and associate professor of political science at the University of Wisconsin in Madison. He is also a research associate in political economy at the United States Studies Centre at the University of Sydney and a faculty affiliate of the La Follette School, the Center for Financial Security, and the Institute for Research on Poverty. He holds a B.A. from UC Berkeley and a Ph.D. from the University of Washington. Ahlquist was project director for the Union Democracy Reexamined project while he was a graduate student at the University of Washington.

Margaret Levi is the Jere L. Bacharach Professor of International Studies at the University of Washington and Senior Fellow, Watson Institute of International Studies, Brown University. She is Foundational Chair in Politics at the University of Sydney's United States Studies Centre, where she is now an Affiliate Professor. She is also Director of the CHAOS (Comparative Historical Analysis of Organizations and States) Center and formerly the Harry Bridges Chair and Director, the Harry Bridges Center for Labor Studies. Levi earned her B.A. from Bryn Mawr College in 1968 and her Ph.D. from Harvard University in 1974, the year she joined the faculty of the University of Washington. She became a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2001 and a John Simon Guggenheim Fellow in 2002. She was a Phi Beta Kappa Visiting Scholar (2006-7) and recipient of the S. Sterling Munro Public Service Teaching Award in 2001. She served as President of the American Political Science Association (2004-5)."																		
"Allen, Al"		Al Allen collection on the International Longshore and Warehouse Union	"Al Allen grew up in San Francisco, Califronia, and entered a career as a longshoreman in International Longshoremen's and Warehousemen's Union, Local 10 (San Francisco). In 1959, Allen came onto the ""B List"" in San Francisco, working as a winch driver. The ILWU created the new hiring category in San Francisco--""B"" men worked irregularly and had the dirtiest jobs, with the promise of promotion to ""A"" status after a year of work, and were not considered full union members until that time. Later in his career there, Allen moved into crane work. Allen was one of the original people to go to work at SeaLand as a supplement prior to the 1971 Pacific Coast Longshore Strike. During that strike, he served as a picket captain. While at ILWU Local 10, Allen also served on the Promotions Commitee. During this period, Allen worked in various different ports on the Pacific Coast, incluing Los Angeles, Portland, and Tacoma.

Later, Allen used the ILWU transfer program to transfer to the growing port of Tacoma, where he became a member of ILWU, Local 23.

During his time in Tacoma's Local 23, Allen formed a coalition with other transferred longshoremen from the Portland local (ILWU Local 8), and advocated reforms in the union's handling of the dispatch system and the qualification for the test necessary to become a crane operator--a coveted job. Eventually, these transfers from Portland and San Francisco began to reform Local 23's internal political culture, winning offices as the local's president, vice president, on the Longshore Relations Committee, as walking bosses, as clerks, and as crane operators--all positions of esteem and influence in the local. Allen also became an internal advocate for union militancy and policing of the contract and working conditions; filing and assisting other members in filing grievances. Allen was also involved in a gender discrimination grievance and lawsuit by Linda Nyland against the Local 23 and the Pacific Martime Association (the employers' organization).

Allen later retired from ILWU 23 and remains living in Tacoma."																		
"Amalgamated Transit Union. Local 587 (Seattle, Wash.)"		"Amalgamated Transit Union, Local 587 records"	"Founded in 1892, Amalgamated Transit Union, Local 587 is the largest ATU local on the West Coast. The local had 4000 active and 300 retired members in King, Clallam and Jefferson counties as of 2011. The main membership is comprised primarily of transit operators, but the union also includes 800 members working in over 80 craft occupations.

ATU Local 587 represents employees of:

King County Metro King County, Washington First Transit King County, Washington Solid Ground King County, Washington Jefferson Transit Authority Jefferson County, Washington Clallam Transit System Clallam County, Washington

ATU 587 has, as of 2012, about 4,000 active and 300 retired members spread throughout King, Jefferson, and Clallam counties, and is the largest West Coast ATU chapter. Also as of 2012, ATU International was the largest transit workers' union in North America, including over 190,000 members in the US and Canada.

On April 8, 1912, the Amalgamated Association of Street and Electric Railway Employees of America, Local 587 was formed by the Rainier Valley Electric Railway Workers. The name was eventually shortened to the Amalgamated Transit Union. The international union itself had been established in 1892, affiliated with the American Federation of Labor and the Knights of Labor. The history of Local 587 is intertwined with that of its major bargaining counterparts: the Seattle Electric Company/Puget Sound Traction, Light, and Power/ Puget Power, Seattle Transit, and Metro Transit/King County Metro Transit. Public transit in Seattle has undergone many changes, peaks, and troughs, each of which greatly affected ATU 587.

The first horse-drawn street railway was built in Seattle in1884, but horse-drawn cars proved troublesome on the city’s many hills. Horses were soon replaced by the first cable cars, introduced in 1887, and several independent streetcar lines were established. With the economic depression of 1893, many of these lines suffered and were bought but Boston-based Stone & Weber, who managed them under the names the Seattle Electric Company, Puget Sound Traction, Light, and Power, or Puget Power. By 1900, Stone and Webster had acquired twenty-two street railway lines and the main power company.

ATU 587’s first major action came in July 1917. Relations were already tense, as Puget Power had cut wages to compensate for operating losses, but things came to a head when two transit employees were fired for joining ATU 587. The remaining 1,500 employees walked out in response. When Puget Sound Traction, Light, and Power brought in strikebreakers, the striking workers rioted and overturned two streetcars in Pioneer Square. This strike shut down operations in the city and forced shipyards to close, so, as it occurred during WWI, the federal government pressured both sides for arbitration. As a result, ATU 587 did not win a wage increase, but the company was prohibited from firing workers solely for joining the union.

In 1918, Puget Power was losing money, in part due to competition from motorized jitney taxes and the private auto. $400,000 behind in taxes to the city, Puget Power asked the city to lease some of its lines. In response, Seattle Mayor Ole Hanson purchased the entire streetcar system from Puget Power (for much more than it was technically worth). Voters approved the plan, paying $15 million (renegotiated to $10 million) and the city assumed control in 1919, renaming the system the Seattle Municipal Railway. After a few years, the city also began to struggle to pay for this system, especially with fares set at the low price of a nickel. To remedy the problem in 1939, Seattle Mayor Arthur Langlie borrowed $10.2 million from New Deal agency the Reconstruction Finance Corporation to pay off Puget Power and purchase 235 trolley buses and 102 motor coaches. By 1941, the last streetcar ran in Seattle (until the 1980s, when streetcars were revived by the waterfront, and later in South Lake Union.

During WWII, ridership rose to 57 million as the government rationed gasoline, while ATU 587 made wartime concessions. A new group of younger leadership took over the ATU 587 in 1945 and committed themselves to strengthening the union and increasing assertiveness. The ATU 587 made major gains in the postwar period, obtaining paid vacation and the first operator wages over $2 per hour.

In the 1950s, though, ridership decreased as Seattleites spread to the suburbs. Tensions grew as Seattle Transit lost money but ATU 587 remained assertive, until union members went on strike in 1956. The city of Seattle eventually won an injunction that declared public employee strikes illegal. Suburban sprawl continued, while voters did not approve sources of funding for transit proposed by the Forward Thrust program. By 1973, it became evident that even the survival of the system was in question, as Seattle Transit faced impending bankruptcy. The Municipality of Metropolitan Seattle (Metro), established in 1958 to deal with waste treatment in the greater Seattle area, received voter authorization to take over the transit system in King County by 1973. With this shift, ATU Local 1384, associated with privately owned Metropolitan Transit Corporation, merged into ATU 587.

Metro Transit tried to decrease costs, to the frustration of ATU 587; at the time, Seattle transit employees made about 15-20% less than employees in other West Coast cities and lacked a cost-of-living adjustment in the face of rapid inflation. Yet Metro was hiring rapidly, and was hesitant to also give employees, new and old, these benefits. ATU 587 went on strike for 15 days in 1974, asking for higher wages and benefits, but Metro was not compliant. A federal mediator was brought in, and parties eventually settled on sick leave, an eight-hour day, and a 34% wage increase for drivers and mechanics, plus cost-of-living increases, though other Metro Transit employees did not gain quite so much. In 1977, Metro instituted part-time drive positions to provide sufficient service during peak times without losing massive amounts of money in off-peak hours. Some ATU 587 members protested this policy with some strategic sickouts, as part-time drivers violated the guarantee of an eight-hour day. However, the union’s eventual position when negotiating the installation of part-time drivers was to try to make the position undesirable, with few benefits, in the hopes that having part-time employees would be untenable and Metro would eliminate the position. This tactic proved shortsighted in many ways, as there were many part-time drivers, so ATU 587 spent much of the following decades trying to improve the working conditions of part-timers. Other issues arose regarding seniority between part-time and full-timer drivers, to be negotiated in the coming decades.

Metro made some changes to operations in Seattle in the 1970s-1990s. It instituted the Ride Free downtown area, implemented services for the handicapped like wheelchair lifts and Paratransit Services, and proposed a 1.3 mile bus tunnel in 1987, completed in 1990. However, Metro ceased to exist in 1994, as it was found unconstitutional, and was replaced by the King County Metro.

ATU 587 has shown concern for worker rights and workplace conditions over the years, particularly in the 1980s-2000s, the period most strongly covered by this collection. In 1980, ATU 587 codified past practice and work rules by writing up extensive contracts, which grew to hundreds of pages and gave the union a stronger legal basis for grievances and other requests. ATU 587 began to represent Clallam Transit Services and Jefferson Transit Authority in the early 1980s, and Paratransit Services in the 1990s. The ATU also was politically active in the 1980s, supporting Greg Nickels for King County Council. In 1989, the Department of Transportation, a federal organization that subsidized much of Metro Transit, began to require random drug testing. This policy led the ATU 587 to a court battle, which it eventually lost. Metro Transit and ATU 587 suffered a tragedy in 1998 when Metro operator Mark McLaughlin was attacked by a gunman while driving a bus across the Aurora Bridge. The bus crashed and fell off the bridge, killing McLaughlin, the shooter, and a passenger. In 2003, the ATU 587 supported a move to bring surveillance cameras onto buses, arguing that cameras would help prevent assaults on drivers. ATU 587 concerns in the last few decades have included issues such as these about workplace conditions.

Throughout much of the 1990s and 2000s, ATU 587 also struggled for higher wages and better benefits as funding for transit remained unstable. Contract negotiations in 1989-1990 proved difficult, as ATU 587 members walked out for several hours and outside negotiators were brought in. ATU 587 won a modest wage increase and benefits. In 1999, State Initiative 695, sponsored by Tim Eyman, proposed to require voter approval for tax increase while lowering vehicle license tab fees from 2.2% of a vehicle’s value to $30. Despite the efforts of the ATU and other groups on the No on I-695 campaign, the initiative passed. Several groups, including ATU 587, took the issue to court, arguing that it did not follow the Washington constitution, which restricts initiatives to one subject. The court threw out I-695, but politicians installed a similar cut on license tabs. In 2000, Eyman proposed another initiative, I-745, which would have designated 90% of state and local transportation for roads, with only 10% left for other forms of transportation. ATU 587 campaigned passionately against the measure, and it was rejected. In 2002, citizens rejected Referendum 51, which would have provided a large amount of funding to improve state transportation, while approving a $30 limit on car tabs. Overall, ATU 587 and King County Metro alike have spent much of the past few decades struggling to find stable transit funding."																		
"American Federation of Teachers. Local 1690 (Edmonds, Wash.)"		"American Federation of Teachers, Local 1690 records"	"American Federation of Teachers Local 1690, the Edmonds Federation of Teachers, was chartered about 1966. It competed with the NEA-affiliated Edmonds Education Association to represent K-12 teachers in the Edmonds, Washington School District #15. The local was most successful in gaining members from secondary schools. Local 1690 became inactive in 1986."																		
"American Federation of Teachers. Local 200 (Seattle, Wash.)"		"American Federation of Teachers, Local 200 Records"	"Labor organization of teachers in Seattle public schools since 1927 .

Local 200 of American Federation of Teachers was chartered in 1921, a union of classroom teachers in Seattle. Local 200 contained several subgroups throughout its history, and the Seattle Teachers' Association and Seattle Federation of Teachers were very prominent rival organizations within the local during the late 1960s through the 1980s."																		
"American Federation of Teachers. Local 336 (Bremerton, Wash.)"		"American Federation of Teachers, Local 336 records"	"The American Federation of Teachers, Local 336 is the oldest teacher's union local in Washington State. The union formed in 1934, in the wake of the National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA) of 1933. Both NIRA and the National Labor Relations Act of 1935, granted collective bargaining rights for workers in most private sector industries but did not guarantee them for public sector workers. Thus, the members of Local 336 organized before teachers and other public employees were legally protected to bargain collectively. Local 336 was the first teacher's union in the nation to be recognized as the sole collective bargaining agent for all teachers within a school district and to successfully negotiate a binding collective bargaining agreement with the school board. The union was also called the Bremerton Federation of Teachers, Local 336 and was affiliated with the American Federation of Teachers as well as the Washington State Federation of Teachers."																		
"American Federation of Teachers. Local 401 (Seattle, Wash.)"		American Federation of Teachers Local 401 records	Labor organization of the University of Washington faculty. Local 401 became disaffiliated with the AFL in 1948.																		
"American Federation of Teachers. Local 1789 (Seattle, Wash.)"		"American Federation of Teachers, Local 1789 records"	"Seattle Central Community College Federation of Teachers was the name of the organization until circa 2002, and then was renamed the American Federation of Teachers, Local 1789. AFT Local 1789, represents teachers at the three campuses of Seattle's community colleges. Teachers, librarians, and counselors are considered faculty and are also represented by the union.

Source: http://aftseattle.wa.aft.org/about-us"																		
"American Federation of Teachers. Local 772 (Everett, Wash.)"		American Federation of Teachers Local 772 records	"This local was affiliated with the American Federation of Teachers. It represented kindergarten through 12th grade public school teachers. It was replaced by an NEA local, the Everett Education Association, ca. 1982."																		
American Federation of Teachers. Local 1485 (Yakima Valley College)		"American Federation of Teachers, Yakima Local 1485 records"																			
"Andes, Henry"		Henry Andes interview transcript																			
"Apostolidis, Paul, 1965-"		Paul Apostolidis interviews and research materials on Pasco meatpacking plant workers	"Paul Apostolidis teaches in the Government Department at the London School of Economics and Political Science in London, UK. Apostolidis was previously the T. Paul Chair of Political Science at Whitman College in Walla Walla, Washington where he taught classes on political theory and U.S. politics. His research focused on Latinx migrant laborers' work experiences, political organizations, and languages of collective action. His books include "																		
Association of Western Pulp and Paper Workers	Q16971094	Association of Western Pulp and Paper Workers records	"West Coast rank-and-file members of the International Brotherhood of Pulp, Sulphite and Paper Mill Workers (AFL-CIO) became dissatisfied with the conduct of wage negotiations by international vice-presidents and those of another international union, the United Papermakers and Paperworkers, with whom a Uniform Labor Agreement had been negotiated. In addition to this dissatisfaction, there was also a feeling that the internationals failed to adequately understand and address local issues. In response they established a new union, the Association of Western Pulp and Paper Workers, in 1964. Litigation followed, and the records document this. A NLRB election was conducted in October 1964, and the Western organization was certified as the Uniform Labor Agreement bargaining agent. The AWPPW survived an attempt by the two internationals to regain their dominance in 1967. As many of the mills pulled out of the Uniform Labor Agreement after this, contracts were negotiaited at the mill level which allowed for a greater degree of dealing with local issues on a mill by mill basis."																		
Eugene Barnett	Q73278937	Eugene Barnett oral history collection	"Eugene Barnett (1892-1973) was born in Caldwell, North Carolina. He worked as a mineworker from the age of eight. After moving to Southwest Washington sometime after 1908, he joined the Industrial Workers of the World. On November 11, 1919, he witnessed the attack on the IWW union hall in Centralia, was arrested, tried, and imprisoned for eleven years. After his release to care for his ill wife, he worked as a miner and in various other occupations."																		
"Bassett, Samuel B., 1896-1971"		Samuel B. Bassett papers	"Bassett was a Seattle plaintiffs lawyer who practiced with George Vandeveer from 1924-1942 and represented the Joint Council of Teamsters, No. 28 and various Teamster locals."																		
"Bates, Matthew C."		Matthew C. Bates papers	"From 1988-2002, Matthew C. Bates handled internal/external communication for the International Association of Machinists' work in the aerospace industry. Bates was involved with negotiations and strikes at the Boeing Company."																		
"Bell, S. Leonard"		S. Leonard Bell papers																			
"Boschok, Jackie, 1952-"		Jackie Boschok papers	"Jackie Boschok (b. April 24, 1952) was a 30-year member, employee, and officer of the International Association of Machinists (IAM) 751. Boschok was also an officer in the Coalition of Labor Union Women (CLUW) Puget Sound chapter as well as a member of the organization's national board. Boschok first became active in the union as soon as she started working at Boeing in 1980, working in a variety of positions and holding a variety of offices including steward and local lodge offices including recording secretary; treasurer; and auditor. Boschok served for seven years on the IAM District Council and worked as a Business Representative beginning in 2001, Union Organizer, and Health and Benefits Representative beginning in 2009. Boschok also served on the Snohomish County Labor Council from 1993-2010, serving on their Executive Board for 10 years and serving on its Community Services Committee. Boschock was a member and leader of the Coalition of Labor Union Women (CLUW) beginning in 1979 and in 1991 became a member of the national Executive Board. Boschok also served on the Washington State Labor Council's Women's Committee from 1994 to 2008, chaired the District 751 Women's Committee beginning in 2006, and served on the United Way of Snohomish County Board of Directors for six years."																		
"Brady, Jerry"		Jerry Brady papers	"Jerry Brady is a retired member of the International Longshore and Warehouse Union, Local 63 (Long Beach and Los Angeles ship's clerks) as well as an active member of the Pacific Coast Pensioners Association. Brady is a poet and often reads his original compositions at pensioner and ILWU related events throughout the Pacific Coast."																		
Brand Responsibility Project		Brand Responsibility Project records	"The Brand Responsibilty Project was a research project by UW Political Science professor Margaret Levi to document the campaign and dispute settlement between Nike Inc. and the Central General de Trabajadores of Honduras (CGT). Following the bankruptcy and closure in January 2009 of two Honduran factories (Hugger and VisionTex) that were part of Nike's supply chain, the CGT of Honduras claimed that Nike bore some of the responsibility for providing terminal compensation, benefits and priority rehiring for 1,800 factory employees. The plight of the Honduran factory workers came to the attention of various fair labor associations and university licensing advisory committees, including The University of Washington's Advisory Committee on Trademarks and Licensing (ACTL) has commenced an oral and digital history project on the recent and historic ACTL. In keeping with its mission, ACTL proceeded to evaluate whether or not Nike had violated the university's code of conduct (that Nike is contractually obligated to uphold) as the basis for its advice whether to renew or terminate the University of Washington's existing contract with Nike to supply university apparel. ACTL was part of a campaign to pressure Nike to ensure the workers received what was owed them under Honduran law. The dispute was resolved successfully when Nike announced on July 29th, 2010, that it had set aside $1.5 million as part of a compensation package for the terminated Hugger and VisionTex employees."																		
"Brotherhood of Railway and Steamship Clerks, Freight Handlers, Express, and Station Employes. Northern Pacific System Board of Adjustment. Tacoma Division"		"Brotherhood of Railway and Steamship Clerks, Freight Handlers, Express, and Station Employees, Northern Pacific System Board of Adjustment Tacoma Division records"	"Formerly Brotherhood of Railway and Steamship Clerks, Freight Handlers, Express, and Station Employees, Northern Pacific System Board of Adjustment, Tacoma Division."																		
"Building & Construction Trades Council (Seattle, Wash.)"		Seattle Building & Construction Trades Council records	"The Seattle Building & Construction Trades Council coordinates the efforts of local unions in the building trades, including contract negotiations with employer organizations and apprenticeship and training programs. It was formerly the Seattle Building Trades Council. Following the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Executive Order 11246, requiring equal employment opportunities in federally funded construction projects, the low numbers of minority workers in the constructions trades became a target of scrutiny. In Seattle and other cities across the country, there were efforts to increase minority membership in the building trade unions. As part of Seattle's participation in the federal Model Cities Program, Seattle issued affirmative action guidelines in 1969 for contractors seeking city contracts. The Seattle Urban League developed a program called Labor Education and Advancement Project, or LEAP. The Washington State Labor Council endorsed the establishment an apprenticeship ""Outreach"" program, to be funded by the U.S. Department of Labor and operated locally by the Seattle Opportunities Industrialization Center. The Seattle Building and Construction Trades Council favored instead a program with the Apprenticeship Information Center. Construction industry employers formed Affirmative Minority Construction Opportunity, Inc., to implement its minority hiring plan. None of these programs enjoyed the support of all of the industry, labor, and community interests needed for success.

In the meantime, community-based organizations were staging protests and fighting in the courts. In fall 1969, several lawsuits resulted when protests by community activists at publicly financed construction sites led to work stoppages. In October 1969, the U.S. Department of Justice brought suit against four buildings trade union locals and three apprenticeship and training committees under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. In the suit, "																		
Building and Construction Trades Council of Bremerton and Vicinity		Building and Construction Trades Council of Bremerton and Vicinity records	"Records of a council composed of building trades unions working in and near Bremerton, Washington. Local building and construction councils coordinate the efforts of local unions that represent workers in the building and construction trades; lobby for policy impacting workers before the executive and legislative branches of state government; and deal with contractors, employer associations, project owners, and public bodies. The Executive Board sometimes acts on behalf of affiliate labor organizations in the legislative, regulatory, and judicial spheres in matters relating to wages, hours, working conditions, health and safety, regulation of work, and employment benefits."																		
"Building Service Employees' International Union. Local 6 (Seattle, Wash.)"		"Building Service Employees' International Union, Local 6 records"																			
"Bulosan, Aurelio"		Aurelio Bulosan papers	"Aurelio Bulosan was the elder brother of Carlos Bulosan, a Filipino-American author, poet, and migrant laborer who left the Philippines for Seattle in 1930."																		
Carlos Bulosan	Q5041871	Carlos Bulosan papers	"Carlos Sampayan Bulosan (c. 1911– September 11, 1956) was a Filipino American author, poet, and activist. A chronicler of the Filipino American experience in during the 1930s-early 1950s on the West Coast, he is best remembered for his semi-fictionalized autobiographical novel "																		
"Cannery Workers and Farm Laborers Union. Local 7 (Seattle, Wash.)"		"Cannery Workers and Farm Laborers Union, Local 7 records"	"Founded in 1933 as the Cannery Workers and Farm Laborers Union, Local 18257 of the American Federation of Labor (AFL), it represented Alaska salmon cannery workers and farm workers. In 1937, the union became Cannery Workers and Farm Laborers Union, Local 7 of the United Cannery, Agricultural, Packing, and Allied Workers of America of the Congress of Industrial Organziations (CIO). In 1945, Local 7 became affiliated with the Food, Tobacco, and Agricultural Workers of America (CIO). In 1951 the union became Local 37 of International Longshoremen's and Warehousemen's Union, and ca. 1987 it became Region 37 of IBU/ILWU. The membership historically was Filipino American cannery workers.

The Cannery Workers' and Farm Laborers' Union was organized June 19, 1933 in Seattle to represent the primarily Filipino-American laborers who worked in the Alaska salmon canneries. Filipino Alaskeros first appeared in the canneries around 1911. In the 1920s as exclusionary immigration laws went into effect, they replaced the Japanese, who had replaced the Chinese in the canneries. Workers were recruited through labor contractors who were paid to provide a work crew for the summer canning season. The contractor paid workers wages and other expenses. This system led to many abuses and harsh working conditions from which grew the movement toward unionization.

The CWFLU, under the leadership of its first President, Virgil Duyungan, was chartered as Local 19257 by the American Federation of Labor in 1933. On December 1, 1936 an agent of a labor contractor murdered Duyungan and Secretary Aurelio Simon. Despite this setback, the union was able to win a hiring hall and end the contract labor system in 1937. After Duyungan's death, Conrad Espe, A Norwegian-American labor organizer, took the leading role in the union. Under the leadership of Duyungan and Espe, the CWFLU made numerous attempts to organize farm workers during the winter months. Farm Division organizers attempted to organize workers in Yakima, Kent, Everett, Bainbridge Island and the White River area, but were often met with harsh opposition from local officials and vigilantes.

Local 18257 came into conflict with the AFL, in 1937 when the parent body, attempting to separate the union along racial lines, recognized a Japanese local organized by Clarence Arai. Local 18257 successfully retained negotiation rights and dispatched its workers in 1937 despite pickets set up by the rival group. Bitterness toward the AFL resulted from the incidents and led to a November 4 vote by the Seattle, Portland, and San Francisco locals to affiliate with the newly formed United Cannery, Agricultural, Packinghouse and Allied Workers of America-CIO (UCAPAWA). In Seattle, Local 18257 became UCAPAWA, Local 7and in San Francisco and Portland Cannery Workers unions also joined UCAPAWA Opponents of reaffiliation, led by John Ayamo and called the ""defeated candidates party,"" received the old 18257 charter and challenged Local 7 for the right to represent cannery workers. On May 4, 1938 the issue was settled in Local 7's favor in a National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) supervised election. The industry representative, Canned Salmon Industry Inc., subsequently recognized the victorious union. Ayamo later formed another AFL union, the Alaska Fish Cannery Workers, under the jurisdiction of the Seafarers International Union. In 1937 also, the CWFLU merged with a rival, the Filipino Protective Association. I.R. Cabatit was president of the union during the period of rivalry with the AFL. When he was succeeded by Trinidad Rojo in 1939, the CWFLU, Local 7 was on the verge of bankruptcy. It was discovered that officers had been selling membership cards, misappropriating funds and neglecting their duties. Rojo cut expenses and returned the union to a sound financial footing.

The years of World War II depleted the union's ranks and brought government-imposed emergency controls, including a ban on strikes and a wage freeze. Although union members returned after the war, the union entered one of its most turbulent decades, one marked by internal struggle and external pressure.

The canning industry trend since the 1930s had been to move company headquarters to Seattle in order to cut down on transportation costs to Alaska. In response, Local 5 of San Francisco and Local 226 of Portland merged with Local 7 in 1943. In the same period, the industry also consolidated into a permanent organization, the Alaska Salmon Industry Inc., which functioned as principal party in contract negotiations.

During the war, the Caballeros de Dimas Alang, a Filipino fraternal organization, emerged as a powerful faction that came to control many positions within the union. Corruption and neglect in the union led disgruntled members to found the Rank and File Committee in 1946. The tension in the union erupted into conflict on February 9, 1947 when union Vice President, Max Gonzales, pulled a gun and shot at, but missed, one of the reformers, Matias Lagunilla. This incident precipitated an investigation by the new International, the Food, Tobacco, Agricultural and Allied Workers Union of America, which had succeeded UCAPAWA earlier that year. The international expelled Gonzales, suspended the other officers and set up an administrative board with Trinidad Rojo as administrative President. The ousted officers formed the Seafood Workers Union and launched a membership drive. The SFWU attempted unsuccessfully to use the courts to dissolve Local 7 and to take over its funds. In 1948, however, after the NLRB declared it to be a company union, the SFWU merged with the Alaska Fish Cannery Workers Union (AFL), a holdover from the dual union battle of 1938, and petitioned the NLRB for representation elections. The NLRB denied representation to Local 7, ruling that the FTA International had not filed non-Communist affidavits, and set an election for April 1949. The campaign was bitter, with Local 7 accused of being a Communist union by the opposition. Before the election, U.S. Immigration officials arrested Local 7's business agent, Ernesto Mangaoang and charged him with being a Communist. Chris Mensalvas, elected to the presidency of Local 7 in 1949, was also arrested. After the CIO, fearing charges of Communism, expelled the FTA International, some Local 7 officers resigned and disassociated themselves from the union. In 1950 a group of these officers, ""defeated candidates"", and other cannery workers joined to form another union, ostensibly ""red-free"" Local 77, UPAWA-CIO, with Vincent Navea as its president. Meanwhile, in 1950, Local 7 affiliated with the International Longshoremen's and Warehousemen's Union (ILWU) and became Local 7-C. In a NLRB representation election in 1950, Local 7-C finally won collective bargaining rights, defeating Local 77 and the AFCWU. In 1951 the union signed a four-year closed shop contract with the canning industry. Local 7-C subsequently became ILWU, Local 37 .

Charges of Communist infiltration continued to haunt Local 37 in the 1950s and Ernesto Mangaoang barely escaped deportation. From the late 1950s to 1977, Local 37 was led by President Gene Navarro. Navarro ran the union on the ""compadre"" system, a cultural system of personal obligations, allegiances and favors. During the 1970s the cannery work force experienced an influx of new laborers - recently arrived Filipino immigrants, young Filipino­Americans and non-Filipino men and women. The new and younger workers were dissatisfied with work conditions and lack of support by the Navarro leadership. As a result, some members including Silme and Nemesio Domingo and Gene Viernes, formed a new organization outside the union: the Alaska Cannery Workers Association (ACWA). Their purpose was to pursue their grievances through legal channels. In 1974, numerous candidates who belonged to ACWA confronted the union after failing to win election and were expelled. After Gene Navarro died in 1976 and was replaced by Tony Baruso, the young reform workers regained their membership. Upon their return, they formed the Rank and File Committee of Local 37. In the 1978 elections, they won 9 positions on the Executive Council, and subsequently won delegate positions and posts on the grievance committee. In 1979, reform forces succeeded in the recall of Secretary­Treasurer Ponce Torres. In the fall of 1980, the reform group gained control of the union with Silme Domingo winning the post of Secretary-Treasurer and Gene Viernes the job of dispatcher. On June 1, 1981, Silme Domingo and Gene Viernes were shot and killed in the union hall. Two young Filipinos, Pompeyo Benito Guloy and Jimmy Bulosan Ramil, were subsequently convicted of the crime. Local 37 president, Tony Baruso was also a suspect in the crime, and was eventually charged, tried, and, in 1991, convicted of planning the murders. Before Baruso's arrest, an internal union investigation looked into his involvement in the crime and also into charges of election fraud. The Rank and File Committee led a successful campaign to oust Baruso after he was found guilty of election fraud. In 1982, the union overwhelmingly elected a reform slate of candidates, including Terri Mast, widow of Silme Domingo, as President. In the 1980s, the union changed its name again to IBU/ILWU, Region 37 reflecting a merger of the Longshoremen's Union with the Inlandboatmen's Union of the Pacific.

For additional historical background on the Cannery Workers Union, see a series of articles by Gene Viernes in the International Examiner in 1977."																		
"Carr, Harry L."		Harry L. Carr papers	"Trade union official of Seattle, Washington. In addition to his labor activites, Carr was the former president and business Representative of Carpenters District Council; president, King County Labor Council; board member, Forward Thrust; member, Seattle City Planning Commission; member, Civic Center Advisory Committee; board member, Greater Seattle Inc.; vice-chair, Metro Action Committee, 1957; vice-president United Good Neighbor Fund, 1958; director, Seattle Convention and Tourist Bureau, 1959; Board member, Seattle World Trade Center, Inc.; co-chair Citizens Emergency Committee for traffic and recreation, circa 1960."																		
Casa Latina	Q30271686	CASA Latina records	"CASA Latina is a worker center and Seattle-based nonprofit that works to educate, assist and empower Latinx and immigrant workers. Founded in 1994 to address the needs of a growing number of Latinx workers arriving in Seattle, the organization began by doing street outreach in borrowed spaces, becoming a nonprofit in 1995. Since 2009, CASA Latina runs a labor dispatch hall and training programs out of a custom-designed, three-building campus in Seattle’s Central District. The campus provides a home for CASA Latina’s ESL classes, job skills and safety training workshops, as well as community organizing for over 750 worker-members.

The ""CASA"" in CASA Latina stands for Centro de Ayuda Solidaria a los Amigos, which means ""Center for Help in Solidarity with Friends."" CASA Latina made history in 2014 when it affiliated with the Washington State Labor Council, AFL-CIO, becoming the first worker center to join the executive board of the state AFL-CIO body. CASA Latina had earlier affiliated with the WSLC in 2009. CASA Latina joined forces with the Martin Luther King County Labor Council in Seattle in 2014. Nationally, CASA Latina is affiliated with the National Day Laborer Organizing Network and National Domestic Workers Alliance. CASA Latina’s programs, curricula, and operations have served as a model for worker centers throughout the country.

[CASA Latina es un centro de trabajadores y una organización sin fines de lucro basada en Seattle que existe para educar, asistir y apoderar a trabajadores Latinx e inmigrantes. Fundado en 1994 para responder a las necesidades de un gran número de trabajadores Latinx llegando a Seattle, la organización empezó por alcance callejero en lugares prestados y se convirtió en una organización sin fines de lucro en 1995. Desde 2009, CASA Latina maneja un centro de trabajo y programas de entrenamiento en un campus de tres edificios, de diseño personalizado, localizado en el Central District en Seattle. En este campus, CASA Latina provee clases de inglés, talleres de habilidades y seguridad en el trabajo, y organización comunitaria para 750 miembros-trabajadores.

La “CASA” en CASA Latina significa Centro de Ayuda Solidaria a los Amigos. CASA Latina hizo historia en 2014 cuando se junt al Washington State Labor Council, AFL-CIO, haciéndose el primer centro de trabajadores de ser parte de la junta ejecutiva del cuerpo AFL-CIO del estado. CASA Latina se había afiliado con el WSLC en 2009. CASA Latina se junto al Martin Luther King County Labor Council en Seattle en 2014. Al nivel nacional casa latina está afiliado al National Day Laborer Organizing Network (red nacional de organizar jornaleros) y National Domestic Workers Alliance (alianza nacional de trabajadores domésticos). Los programas, el currículo y las operaciones de CASA Latina han servido como modelo para centros de trabajadores al través del país.]"																		
"Castle, Del, 1915-2006"		Del Castle papers	"Castle (1915-2006) was a labor activist, union officer and member. Born in Spokane, Washington, Castle graduated from Broadview High School in Seattle and the University of Washington but worked mainly in blue collar jobs like lumber mills, railroad yards, steelmills, shipyards and longshoring. Castle first became a labor organizer in the 1930s, participating in strikes with the Sawmill and Timber Workers Union and an early farmworkers union. In 1937, as co-chair of the King County Workers Alliance he helped organize a two week occupation of the King County Council chambers by hundreds of the unemployed seeking benefits. In 1942 he was elected secretary of the Shipscaler's Union. After WWII, he organized lumberworkers in Aberdeen. During the Korean War, Del was active in the anti-war movement, as he would be later during the Vietnam War and the Iraq wars. In 1957, Del became a longshoreman, joining ILWU, Local 19. He served on the Executive Board from 1963 until he retired in 1980. He was elected to one term as secretary of Local 19 in 1975. Following his retirement, he served as editor of the Rusty Hook, the newsletter for retired longshore workers, until, at age 89, he felt it was time to step down."																		
"Caughlan, John, 1909-1999"		John Caughlan papers	"John Caughlan was a Seattle attorney and civil rights leader.

John Caughlan was born in Missouri in 1909, the son of a Methodist clergyman. The Caughlan family moved to Eastern Washington in 1911, living chiefly in Ellensburg, and then to Seattle where Caughlan graduated from Ballard High School and earned a B.A. at the University of Washington. In the early 1930s he enrolled briefly in a graduate program in English literature at Yale University but, feeling the discipline to be removed from the issues of the day (the problems of the Great Depression and the proposed solutions of the New Deal), he enrolled instead in Harvard Law School, graduating in 1935.

Caughlan returned to Seattle in 1937 after a short stint in New York. He worked briefly for a law firm but was fired after refusing to withdraw from a case in which he represented the Communist Party in a dispute with the city, which had revoked the Party's lease for the Civic Auditorium. In 1938 Caughlan became a deputy prosecutor for King County, although he took leave from this position to represent the Grays Habor Civil Rights Committee as they investigated the destruction of a public hall in Aberdeen, Washington. He also represented CIO official Dick Law at the inquest into the death of his wife, labor activist Laura Law.

Caughlan returned to the King County Prosecutor's Office in 1940, but was informed that he would only be permitted to resume work there if he would publicly denounce the Soviet Union. He refused to do so, was dismissed, and spent the rest of his career in private practice, having as partners at various times Siegfried Hesse, Leonard Schroeter, C.T. Hatten and Lee A. Holley.

Civil liberties and human rights were the two overarching concerns that informed Caughlan's professional activities. In the 1940s and 1950s he represented labor unions, union activists, the Communist Party, the Washington Pension Union, Henry Huff in the Smith Act case of United States v. Henry Huff et al., foreign-born residents facing deportation because of their political activities, and individuals accused of ""subversive"" or ""un-American"" activities in cases related to the Smith Act, the McCarran Act, and the McCarran-Walter Act. Hazel Wolf was one of these, threatened with deportation for Commumist Party membership. He also represented, with his partner C.T. ""Barry"" Hatten, a number of witnesses before the hearings conducted by the Washington State Legislature's Joint Legislative Fact Finding Committee on Un-American Activities, led by Albert F. Canwell, in 1947-1948. He also represented several individuals before the House Committee on Un-American Affairs (HUAC) at its Seattle hearings in 1954, and handled many cases involving screening of Coast Guard personnel. Caughlan had been charged with perjury in 1948, two years after stating in the course of testifying in an immigration case that he was not a member of the Communist Party. He was acquitted, but was himself called before HUAC in 1954 to face the charge again. In 1961 Caughlan was convicted of failure to pay income tax. He served six months in the federal prison camp on McNeil Island and was suspended from practice for thirty days.

Five of Caughlan's cases went to the United States Supreme Court; the most significant of these were Herbert Schneider vs. Willard Smith, Commandant, United States Coast Guard, 1968, which invalidated Cost Guard screening procedures for personnel on United States merchant marine vessels, and United States vs. Eugene Robel, 1967, which invalidated a section of the Subversive Activities Control Act (McCarran Act) which had prohibited employment at defense facilities of members of Communist-action organizations.

In the 1960s and 1970s Caughlan's focus moved to other issues such as segregation and racial discrimination, and human rights beyond the United States. He travelled to Mississippi in the summer of 1964 with other attorneys to assist in the defense of civil rights activists there; at home in Seattle he was involved in racially charged cases, working with members of the Black Panther Party and protesting inquest procedures (which were later changed) in the inquest into the killing of black activist Larry Ward by Seattle police. Caughlan handled many conscientious objector and Selective Service cases during the Vietnam War.

Human rights abuses by governments supported by the United States were an issue of ongoing concern for Caughlan. In 1977 he went to the Philippines as part of a delegation headed by former United States Attorney General Ramsey Clark, on a fact-finding mission to investigate human rights violations by the Marcos regime. During the 1980s he travelled several times to Central America, particularly Nicaragua, participating in a National Lawyers Guild mission in 1984 to observe the Nicaraguan elections, and also represented Central American refugees in their immigration cases. After the1981 murders of Filipino union organizers and anti-Marcos activists Silme Domingo and Gene Viernes, Caughlan was part of the legal team which represented the families in a civil suit against Ferdinand and Imelda Marcos and the Republic of the Philippines, and which was ultimately successful in proving a connnection between the Marcos regime and the murders. In the 1980s Caughlan was also much concerned with nuclear power issues, serving as part of the legal team that defended environmental activists of the Crabshell Alliance after their demonstrations against the construction of the Satsop nuclear facility. He also helped to draft state initiatives banning the importation of nuclear waste into Washington state, and requiring voter approval of the construction of nuclear facilities. In the late 1980s Caughlan became very involved with the Oakland, California-based Line of March, an organization dedicated to the study and analysis of the history and development of Marxist-Leninist thought.

In the 1990s, Caughlan was part of the legal team working on the case of Willem Eickholt, whose boat was seized by United States Customs officials upon his return from a humanitarian mission to Cuba. During this time Caughlan was active in the cause of independent and small party politics, and was involved in the effort to promote Ralph Nader's 1996 presidential campaign.

Caughlan served on the board of directors of the American Civil Liberties Union of Washington. He was a member of the National Lawyers Guild from its founding in 1937 and served on its executive board and committee and as chairperson of its International Committee. He was also a founder and an active member of the Seattle chapter of the National Lawyers Guild. Caughlan died on April 17, 1999."																		
Central Contractors Association		Central Contractors Association records																			
"Clancy, Joseph,  -1973"		Joseph Clancy papers	"Joseph Clancy was Secretary of the International Brotherhood of Boilermakers, Iron Ship Builders and Helpers of America, Local 104, in Seattle, Washington from 1941 to 1972. In 1946, tensions escalated between International President Charles J. MacGowan and members of Local 104 after the president attempted to take control of the Local through an appointed board of governors. Clancy and fellow officer Bill Miller were subsequently tried and suspended from the local after refusing to turn over Local 104's funds, newspaper, and records to MacGowan. Initially MacGowan's actions were upheld after the case was first taken to the Seattle superior court by members of the local; however, this decision was reversed several years later by the Washington State Supreme Court. The local was given back control over elections of officers, and Clancy was re-elected to Local 104 in the mid-1950s. Clancy passed away in 1973 shortly after finishing his term as union Secretary in 1972."																		
"Clifford, Bill (Labor activist)"		Bill Clifford audiocassettes of Ottilie Markholt's memorial	"Bill Clifford is a Seattle area labor unionist and activist. He knew Tacoma historian, labor union member, labor activist, and historian Ottilie Markholt from his adolescence until her death in 2004."																		
"Coder, Bob"		"Robert ""Bob"" Coder Lockheed Shipbuilding Company Lockout scrapbook"	"Robert ""Bob"" Coder was a member of International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Local 46--one of 13 maritime trade locals locked out by Lockheed Shipbuilding Company in 1986-1987."																		
"Columna, Potenciano, 1905-1997"		Potenciano Parin Columna digitized scrapbook	"Potenciano Parin Columna was born on May 19, 1905 in General Trias, Cavite, Philippines. He often went by ""Parin Colombo."" Columna traveled to the United States in 1924, eventually moving to Los Angeles after brief stays in Vancouver, Seattle and New York. In 1933, Columna earned his pilot's license, becoming the first Filipino pilot in the United States. During World War II, Columna served in the armed forces as a technician overseas. He was also a long-term member of the Caballeros de Dimas-Alang, a fraternal organization in the Filipino community and filled many important leadership roles. When Carlos Bulosan, a noted Filipino novelist, poet and labor activist, was ill with tuberculosis and receiving treatment at the Los Angeles County Sanitarium (now the USC Medical Center), Columna and the Caballeros raised funds to help cover Bulosan's medical costs and try to send Bulosan back to the Philippines to recover. Columna also acted as the manager of The Luau, a Polynesian restaurant in Beverly Hills where he frequently hired Filipino immigrants, often for their first jobs in the United States. He acted as a benefactor for several Filipino students as they made their way through college, continuing to be an important leader in the Los Angeles Filipino community until his death on January 7, 1997."																		
"Copeland, Tom, 1950-"		Tom Copeland research materials on Elmer Smith and the Centralia Tragedy	Tom Copeland is the author of 																		
"Cornish, Megan"		Megan Cornish papers	"Megan (pronounced MEG-on) Cornish grew up in various locations around the United States. Cornish moved to Washington state after earning her BA from Cornell University in 1969. Cornish worked at the Shelter Half antiwar G.I. Coffee House in Tacoma; and was an active supporter of the United Construction Workers Association (UCWA); and picketed on behalf of striking University of Washington clerical and maintenance workers--part of the Staff Organizing Committee (later the United Workers Union-Independent). Cornish was also an active member of Radical Women, a socialist feminist organization co-founded by Clara Fraser in Seattle.

Fraser was selected to organize an Electrical Trades Trainee (ETT) program at Seattle City Light, she recruited Cornish and dozens of other feminist movement activists to apply. Cornish was hired along with nine other women as ETT employees.

The ETT women’s struggle with City Light management and sometimes with the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers Union, Local 77 to hire women and challenge workplace sexism was hard fought. Cornish, along with her Radical Women colleagues Heidi Durham and Teri Bach, pushed the hardest and were targeted for some of the worst backlash. In the process, Cornish broke through a number of barriers. She became only the second female operator and the first female power dispatcher at Seattle City Light. Eventually promoted to senior power dispatcher, Cornish helped found the Committee for Equal Rights at City Light (CERCL) and, in 1991, was named Active Advocate of the Year, along with her longtime colleague Heidi Durham, by Washington Women in the Trades. She retired in 2004 after thirty years at City Light.

Cornish remains a committed member of Radical Women and the Freedom Socialist Party (FSP), as well as an antiwar activist and an environmental advocate. She has written numerous articles, pamphlets, and a few books on a range of topics over the last 30 years, which have been published by the Freedom Socialist Party publishing arm, Red Letter Press.

Text based on Megan Cornish oral history interview, Cornish, Megan interview with Nicole Grant and Alex Morrow ""Radical Women; Freedom Socialist Party; Electrical Trades Trainee (ETT) Program, Seattle City Light,"" Seattle Civil Rights & Labor History Project < http://depts.washington.edu/civilr/cornish.htm>"																		
"Corr, Cecilia, 1914-2006"		William and Cecilia Corr papers	"William John (Bill) Corr (1906-1984) and his wife, Cecilia Genevieve Brodine Corr (1914-2006), were activists in Seattle interested in socialism, labor, civil rights, and the environment. Cecilia Corr was also an artist.

Bill was born in New York City to Irish immigrant parents. Leaving school after the 8th grade, he eventually became a union organizer and a member of the Communist party. He met Cecilia, daughter of Swedish immigrants living in Seattle, when she visited her brother Franz, who was Bill’s roommate. After marrying in 1936, Bill and Cecilia moved to Seattle to raise their family of four sons.

Bill worked as a circulation manger for the Washington New Dealer for a short time, resigning in 1939. During World War II he worked as a welder and was an active unionizer until his communist associations were revealed in the 1950s. From that time on, he worked as small business contractor and engaged in environmental activism, notably serving as Acting Chairman in the Save Cypress Island Committee in the 1960s and 1970s. Cecilia contributed to this effort, producing a block print for Heritage & Legacy: The Story of the Cypress Island Co-operative.

Cecilia’s participation in peace efforts and civil rights also included involvement with the Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom (WILPF), Citizens' Train, Washington State Council of American-Soviet Friendship, and the Washington Committee to Protect the Foreign Born. During the late 1950s ,Cecilia wrote to US congresspeople on a wide range of issues. Cecilia contributed to her activism through her artistic skills, illustrating newsletters for the Washington State Council of American-Soviet Friendship, for which she served as co-editor in the late 1980s, and creating other political sketches. She also worked for the University of Washington as an illustrator during 1959 and 1960."																		
"Costantini, Peter"		"Peter Costantini manuscript of ""The Whacking of Ship Scalers Local 541"""	"Peter Costantini is a former ship scaler and was a member of Local 541 in 1977 and 1978 working at Todd Shipyards, later moving to construction in Laborers Local 242."																		
"Coughlin, Gilbert"		Gilbert Coughlin labor button collection	"Gilbert Coughlin Sr. was a labor union member and organizer in Tacoma. As part of his union activities, he collected these buttons."																		
"Daschbach, John S."		John S. Daschbach papers	"John S. Daschbach was a salesman, teacher, and civil rights worker from Seattle, Washington. He chaired the Washington Civil Rights Congress, the local branch of a national organization organized in 1946 as an association for the ""defense of the constitutional rights and civil liberties of the American people, including Communists and Negroes."" The Civil Rights Congress, accused of being a Communist front organization, was investigated by the Subversive Activities Control Board and a grand jury. In 1956 the organzation and its branches dissolved. The Civil Rights Congress took an interest in cases which involved Communists or Black Americans whom the National Congress supported with legal assistance, fund raising, and publicity. Daschbach was one of seven defendants who were arrested in 1952 as accused Communists and tried in 1953 under the Smith Act in U.S. vs. Huff et. al. Daschbach was also a board member, extension director, and teacher at the Seattle Labor School (also known as the Pacific Northwest Labor School). His wife, Marjorie Daschbach, was also a board member."																		
"Deal, Clyde W."		Clyde W. Deal papers	"Clyde Deal was a founder, president and business manager of the Ferryboatmen's Union of California, later the Inlandboatmen's Union of the Pacific, from 1918 to 1941. He joined the U.S. Conciliation Service in 1941 as a commissioner and served until 1945. For two years he was labor counselor in charge of labor negotions for the ""Atlanta Journal."" He rejoined the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service from 1948 to 1958. From 1958 to 1969, he was an arbitrator in labor disputes in California and Oregon. From 1965 to 1969, he was a labor consultant at the Tongue Point Job Corps Center in Oregon."																		
Deep Sea Fishermen's Union of the Pacific		Deep Sea Fishermen's Union of the Pacific records	"The Deep Sea Fishermen's Union (DSFU) was established in November 1912 to represent the interests of fishermen, many of whom worked aboard boats owned by others. Fishing was and continues to be a very dangerous occupation. Workers formed unions to help mitigate the risks of this dangerous occupation and to ensure that they were paid fairly by the vessel owners.

The union represents long-line fishermen- those who use fishing lines and hooks to obtain their catch as opposed to dragging nets behind a vessel. Over the course of its history, the DSFU has been active in the management of halibut fisheries, and were among the groups that helped to establish the International Pacific Halibut Commission in the 1920s. The union has advocated for and helped establish programs of conservation and fleet management through government and self-regulation. In the wake of the establishment of a 200-mile offshore fishing limit in 1976, the DSFU continues to be active in that process of fishing and conservation. Because of this model, the union has evolved to an organization that is not only the collective bargaining agent of workers in relation to ship owners, but a body that lobbies for legislation and policies that are in the interest of its members."																		
"Dennett, Eugene V., 1908-"		Eugene V. Dennett papers	"Eugene Dennett was born in 1908 in Revere, Massachusetts to a working-class family. His parents named him for the Socialist leader, Eugene V. Debs. Dennett attended Oregon Normal School and taught school until 1931. In the 1930s he joined the Communist Party under the name Victor Haines and in 1931 became Agitation and Propaganda Director for the Communist Party, Northwestern District Buro in Seattle. As a result of conflict with the District Organizer, Dennett was sent to Bellingham in 1932 as Party section organizer. He eventually drifted away from active participation in the Communist Party because of his political disagreements with the district leadership. In 1934 he joined the Civilian Conservation Corps and edited CCC camp newspapers at Yale, Washington and Metaline Falls, Washington. He was discharged from this job in 1935 because of his radical pro-labor leanings.

Dennett moved to Seattle, found a job on a ferry boat, joined the Ferryboatmen's Union (later renamed the 

After rejoining the Communist Party in 1936, Dennett was active in the Washington Commonwealth Federation and served as WCF Vice President from 1938 to 1940. In 1937 he managed Hugh DeLacy's successful campaign for Seattle City Council. In 1938 he was elected the first Executive Secretary of the new Washington State Industrial Union Council (CIO), serving two years before he and other left-wing executive board members were removed at John L. Lewis' orders.

Dennett next went to work at Bethlehem Steel, Seattle, and joined the Steel Workers Organizing Committee. Meanwhile, Dennett and his wife, Harriette, led a large Communist Party unit in a working class Seattle neighborhood during the early years of World War II. In 1943 Dennett was drafted into the Army. After the war, he returned to Bethlehem Steel. His disagreements with the Communist Party led to his expulsion in 1947 on charges of being an FBI agent. He continued his activity in Steelworkers Local 1208, holding the office of Recording Secretary and serving on the local's Grievance Committee. After conflicts with the union hierarchy and Bethlehem management he was expelled from the union in 1954. In 1955 he was subpoenaed by the House Un-American Activities Committee. Following his initial resistance, Dennett testified before the Committee about his past associations with the Party. He continued working at the mill until 1966 when a confrontation with management and health problems induced him to retire.

Dennett worked several years as a longshoremen's cargo checker on the Seattle docks until his retirement in 1972. In 1979 he visited China as a member of a U.S. Booksellers Delegation to the PRC. He died in 1989.

For further biographical information, see Eugene Dennett's autobiography,"																		
"Domingo, Cindy"		Cindy Domingo papers	"Cindy Domingo, along with her brothers and sisters, played a key role in the Asian American and Filipino youth movements of the 1970s, and has been a community leader in the Seattle area since then. In the 1970s, she helped lead solidarity campaigns on the University of Washington campus against the Marcos dictatorship in the Philippines. She was active in the Union of Democratic Filipinos (KDP), for which she did organizing in Seattle and Oakland. On June 1st, 1981, Cindy's brother Silme Domingo, a KDP organizer and union reform activist in ILWU Local 37, was assassinated along with fellow union leader Gene Viernes. For the next ten years, Cindy served as the National Chair for the Committee for Justice for Domingo and Viernes. The campaign resulted in the conviction of the former ILWU Local 37 President and family friend Tony Baruso for organizing the assassination, and also proved that the murders had been ordered by the Marcos regime with U.S. government knowledge.

Cindy Domingo was an active member of the Washington State Rainbow Coalition in the 1980s, and served on the boards of the Church Council of Greater Seattle, LELO, and the International Examiner. She has been Board President of the Center for Social Justice and co-chair of U.S. Women & Cuba Collaboration, and currently serves as the Legislative Aide to King County Councilmember Larry Gossett."																		
"Donahoe, Ed"		Oral history interview with Ed Donahoe	"Journalist, editor of ""Washington Teamster."" Began in 1941 as writer for ""Washington Teamster."" Also did moonlighting for Seattle P-I and Seattle Times."																		
"Douglas, Jim 1946-2017"		Jim Douglas papers	"Jim Douglas is an attorney who has practiced Social Security disability law since 1978. Douglas was part of a legal team working for the families of slain Seattle labor unionists Silme Domingo and Gene Viernes in a civil suit against Philippines dictator Ferdinand Marcos for orchestrating the 1981 assassinations of the union reformers in their Pioneer Square office. The two men had been working with an international community in opposition of the dictator, who had cracked down on the political left and trade unions in the Phillippines when we seized power and declared martial law.

In December of 1989, a jury found that Ferdinand and Imelda Marcos were responsible for the murders and awarded $15 million to the families of Domingo and Viernes. This marked the first time that a foreign dictator was held responsible for crimes committed in the United States.

Douglas was also a co-founder of the Seattle chapter of Line of March, a Marxist-Leninist national political organization in the 1980s dedicated to peace and social justice."																		
"Duggan, Robert D., 1932-"		Robert Duggan papers	"Robert D. Duggan, known to all as ""Bob"" was born in Seattle, Washington on September 7, 1932. Bob graduated from Foster High School in 1950 and immediately enrolled at University of Washington summer program. He also started work on the Seattle waterfront in August 1950. His longshore employment paid all the costs of his college education and later a large portion of his law school education. He graduated with a BA in Labor Economics in June of 1954. In December 1954 he was called to active duty with the United States Air Force. In February 1956 he was awarded his ""wings"" as a jet fighter pilot. In December 1955 he married Martha H."" Marty"" Duggan (1934-2003), the mother of his 3 children, In September 1958, he entered the University of Washington School of Law, graduating 1961. In September 1961, he began what turned out to be 40 years of law practice, representing longshoremen, harbor workers, seaman and fishermen. He also represented all ILWU locals in Washington over that 40 year span. In 1989-90 while serving as president of the University of Washington Alumni Association, he began to promote the idea of establishing an endowed chair in honor of Harry Bridges. He was instrumental in raising the funds to establish the chair in 1992. Bob married Judith Turner Duggan on December 17, 2006."																		
"Durham, Heidi"		Heidi Durham papers and oral history interviews	"Heidi Durham (1953-2015) was a participant in Seattle City Light's Electrical Trades Trainee (ETT) Program in the early 1970s, and was one of the first women to be admitted to an apprenticeship program in City Light's skilled trades. When the City eliminated the Electrical Trades Trainee Program punitively for the activism of the programs director and the participants, Durham was one of the plaintiffs in a civil rights complaint which restored the program's participants ability to get skilled craft training and continued employment.

Heidi Durham was born and raised in San Pedro, California in 1954, and moved to Bellingham, Washington in 1971 to attend Western Washington University. She moved to Seattle in 1973 and joined Radical Women, a socialist feminist organization led by Clara Fraser.

Durham began working in the food service industry. In 1974, Fraser was tasked with creating a recruitment and training program for female electrical workers at Seattle City Light, the Electrical Trades Trainee (ETT). Durham was recruited in a competitive application process and, at 21, became the youngest of the 10-member ETT program. As one of three Radical Women members among the group, Durham played a leading role in the struggle for gender and race equity at the utility, where she co-founded the Employee Committee for Equal Rights at City Light (CERCLE) in 1983, and in her union, International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Local 77.

Following a landmark verdict on behalf of the women in January of 1976, Durham became one of the first women admitted to City Light’s Line Worker apprenticeship program.

Durham worked on the line crews until suffering a broken back in a near-fatal fall from the top of an electrical pole in 1977. Durham was partially paralyzed but fought to continue working in the field, returning to City Light as a Junior Power Station Operator. When she retired in 2004, she held the title of Senior Power Station Operator.

Through her longtime leadership in Radical Women and the Freedom Socialist Party, Durham participated in various political causes. In 1984, Durham co-founded the Ad Hoc Committee for Fair Employment and Open Housing, which successfully organized community support to defend and strengthen Seattle anti-discrimination laws.

Durham was also a writer. In 1982, she wrote The War on the Disabled: Adding Insult to Injury and co-authored Women Workers: Sparkplugs of Labor with Megan Cornish in 1990.

In 1991, Durham campaigned for City Council on the Freedom Socialist Party ticket. That same year, she was named Active Advocate of the Year, along with fellow ETT pioneer Megan Cornish, by Washington Women in the Trades. In 2004, Durham was a member of the Seattle Organizing Committee for the Million Worker March on Washington, D.C. and was a featured speaker at the event. Durham died in August of 2015 at the age of 62.

Biography Sources:

Belew, Ellie. 2019. High voltage women: breaking barriers at Seattle City Light. Seattle: Red Letter Press (Forthcoming: March 2019)

Grant, Nicole. “Heidi Durham: Electrical Trades Trainee (ETT) Program, Seattle City Light” Seattle Civil Rights & Labor History Project. https://depts.washington.edu/civilr/durham.htm

Grant, Nicole. “Challenging Sexism at City Light: The Electrical Trades Trainee Program” Seattle Civil Rights & Labor History Project. http://depts.washington.edu/civilr/citylight.htm (Data accessed January 2018).

https://socialism.com/fs-article/farewell-to-heidi-durham-revolutionary-feminist-and-fighter-for-the-oppressed/ Seattle Times https://www.legacy.com/obituaries/seattletimes/obituary.aspx?n=heidi-durham&pid=175821675

Related Resources:

Casey, Conor. “How Minority Men and Tradeswomen Won Justice on the Jobsite.” Lecture, Museum of History and Industry History Café, Seattle, February 21, 2018. https://tinyurl.com/JusticeJobsite

Casey, Conor “Justice on the Jobsite: Collections on Labor Organizing of Minority Men and Tradeswomen at the University of Washington Libraries' Labor Archives of Washington and Special Collections"" Pacific Northwest Quarterly. Summer 2018 Issue.

Belew, Ellie. 2013. Bringing power to the people: the history of IBEW Local #77."																		
"Elkins, Morris"		Morris Elkins papers																			
"Everett Education Association (Everett, Wash.)"		Everett Education Association records																			
"Eyer, John H.,  -1986"		John H. Eyer papers	"Professional:

John H. Eyer (1906-1986) was an organizer, international representative and training specialist based in Portland, Oregon, for the International Brotherhood of Pulp, Sulphite and Paper Mill Workers (IBPSandPMW) from about 1951-1964. Eyer became training specialist in 1956 which emerged into a permanent position as Representative of the International’s West Coast Research and Education Department in 1957, traveling frequently to locals across the West Coast. Part of this work also included the performance of job analyses, evaluating wages and contracts of locals within the union. At this time, he became a confidant of Research and Education head, George W. Brooks, who figured prominently in the internal campaign for reform, and whose forced resignation in 1961 precipitated the formation of the Rank and File Movement for Democratic Action (RFMDA). An organization created by dissatisfied members of the International, the RFMDA had participation from members of paper worker locals across the United States and even parts of Canada. This reform movement was the catalyst for the formation of new union, the Association of Western Pulp and Paper Workers (AWPPW) in 1964. Along with many members in favor of the reform, John Eyer moved over to the rebel union, AWPPW, becoming an International Representative and chairing its Job Analysis Program. He also served as General Vice President of the AWPPW in the late 1960s. In addition to union involvement, he was also active in the City Club of Portland and served on the Executive Boards of the American Civil Liberties Union of Oregon and the World Without War Council of Portland.

Personal:

John Howard Eyer was born August 28, 1906 to Mildred Neal and Wilson Eyer. John also had an older brother named Lowell. In June 1930, he married Alice Meisel. John and Alice gave birth to daughter Janet Helen Eyer, who later gave birth to his granddaughter, Susan. Alice Eyer passed away in 1969. John Eyer married again sometime in the 1970s to Rosa Millo, Recording Secretary of AWPPW Local 644 in Everett, Washington and Secretary-Treasurer of the AWPPW Northern Washington and Alaska Area Council. John Eyer passed away in 1986."																		
"Eyer, Rosa M., 1910-1997"		Rosa M. Eyer papers	"Rosa Millo Eyer (1910-1991) was Recording Secretary of the Association of Western Pulp and Paper Workers (AWPPW) Local 644 in Everett, Washington in 1965 and AWPPW Secretary-Treasurer of the Northern Washington and Alaska Area Council during the 1960s and 1970s. She gave birth to three daughters: Gerry, Josephine, and Caroline with first husband Richard J. Millo. She later married Pacific Northwest paper worker representative John H. Eyer around the mid to late 1960s. Rosa retired from the union in 1972. She passed away in Everett, Washington at the age of 81 on November 10, 1991."																		
Familias Unidas por la Justicia		Familias Unidas por la Justicia records and ephemera	"Familias Unidas por la Justicia (FUJ), is farmworker union comprised of Mixteco and Triqui families. In 2015, FUJ affiliated with the Washington State Labor Council, AFL-CIO."																		
"Farmers' Union (Walla Walla, Washington Territory)"		Farmers' Union records	Agricultural association.																		
"Flynn, Leo F., 1885-"		Leo F. Flynn papers	"Leo Francis Flynn (1885-1970) was born in Waseca County, Minnesota. He was President of the Washington State Council of United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America and an organizer for the American Federation of Labor from 1938-1956. He was married to Myra L. Flynn."																		
"Fox, Michael J. (Michael James), 1944-"		Michael Fox papers	"Judge Michael James Fox was born in New London, Connecticut in 1944. During the 1960s, he became politically active in the Civil Rights Movement. While attending law school in Georgia, Fox was part of the Legal Aid Society—an organization that provided legal services to people from low-income backgrounds. After law school, his experience with the Legal Aid Society greatly influenced his decision to continue to help underrepresented people. Having also acquired Spanish speaking skills, Fox became interested in working with the large population of Spansih-speaking Latino/a farmworkers. In 1965, the US Congress created the Office of Economic Opportunity which funded the Legal Services Program, a private non-profit corporation providing legal services to people living in poverty. In that same year, a strike of Filipino American grape pickers in Delano, California gained the cooperation of Cesar Chavez and others, who began organizing migrant agricultural workers in California. Using the same organizing model, workers in Washington State organized an independent branch of the United Farm Workers of Washington State in 1967. In 1969, Fox moved to Washington through the Reginald Heber Smith Fellowship, a program that places lawyers in areas to help those who do not have access to legal aid, and discovered that the state had the fourth largest migrant farmworker population in the country. In the following year, the wildcat hop strikes began in the Yakima Valley. Fox connected with the organizers of the hop strikes, Tomás Villanueva and Lupe Gamboa, and offered to provide legal representation to the emerging farmworkers union. As the UFW lawyer, Fox in"																		
"Frank, Dana"		Dana Frank ephemera collection on Seattle labor and women's activism	"Dana Frank is a professor of history at the University of California, Santa Cruz. Frank used the University of Washington's Special Collections in researching her book Purchasing Power. Frank is also an expert on human rights and U.S. policy in Honduras."																		
Clara Fraser	Q5125986	Clara Fraser papers	"Clara Fraser was born Clara Doris Goodman in Los Angeles on March 12, 1923 to Russian-Jewish immigrant parents, Samuel and Emma Goodman. Her father was an anarchist and her mother worked in the garment industry. She grew up in a multi-racial neighborhood, the East Side ghetto of Los Angeles, which Fraser described as a very poor, but highly political environment. While in junior high school in the 1930s, Clara joined the Young People’s Socialist League, prompted by the despair of the Great Depression. In 1939 to 1945, Fraser attended UCLA and graduated with degrees in literature, education, and drama. She then joined the Trotskyist Socialist Workers Party in 1945. After marrying at the age of 18, she and her first husband, Frank Krasnowsky, moved to Chicago. They then moved to Seattle to organize a Socialist Workers Party during the post-war era. Working as an assembly line electrician at Boeing, Fraser participated in the Boeing Strike of 1948. During the 1950s and 1960s, Fraser was very active in labor socialist politics. She worked vigorously to end racial segregation and the Vietnam War. She also supported women’s rights. In 1966 when the Seattle branch of the Socialist Workers Party left the organization, Fraser helped form the Freedom Socialist Party. Fraser and other feminists began a Free University of Seattle class titled ""Marx and the Women's Question"" which was the beginning of the Women's Studies Program at the University of Washington. Soon after, she joined the original Seattle Opportunities Industrialization Center (SOIC) and CEP, the job training arms of the anti-poverty program. She became a consultant on feminism and race relations for many public agencies. In 1967, Fraser, along with Gloria Martin and the young women of the New Left, founded Radical Women. Radical Women worked with and supported African American anti-poverty programs, Native American fishing rights, and Asian American protests for low-income housing.

After being fired from SOIC, Seattle City Light hired Fraser in 1973 as an education coordinator of the Electrical Trades Trainee Program for women. On July 11, 1975, Seattle City Light fired her, claiming that her dismissal was due to budgetary cuts. The Seattle Department of Human Rights, directed under Vivian L. Caver, a black woman civil rights and political activist, found that Fraser was discriminated because of her public affiliation with the Feminist Coordinating Council, Radical Women, and the Freedom Socialist Party. When the workers of Seattle City Light rose up against Superintendent Gordon Vickery, director of the agency, in 1974, Fraser was the leading critic and spokesperson for the massive employee walkout. She then became involved with a recall campaign against Mayor Wes Uhlman.

A legendary case not only in Seattle but across the nation, Fraser garnered broad support from local and national labor, feminist, gay, and labor unions, women’s groups, the LGBT community, and minority groups including the Black Panther Party chapters in Los Angeles and Seattle, the Native American Rights Advocate, and the Asian Law Association. In 1981, the court ruled in favor of Fraser, upholding protection for employees against sex and political discrimination. Seattle City Light was ordered to award her $135,265.00 in back pay, damages, and interests, reinstatement of her retirement account, social security contributions, and restoration of sick leave, dental and vacation benefits.

Fraser died on February 24, 1998 in Seattle, Washington."																		
Freedom Socialist Party	Q4411098	Freedom Socialist Party National Office (Seattle) records	"The Freedom Socialist party is a revolutionary socialist feminist organization that does intersectional organizing against racism, sexism, homophobia, and labor exploitation. The FSP's political analysis sees women's leadership and political action as decisive to social change and trains women to lead in these campaigns. The immediate forerunner of the Freedom Socialist Party began with the Kirk-Kaye tendency within the Socialist Workers Party, led by Dick Fraser (Kirk) and Clara Fraser (Kaye) who were married at the time. The Kirk-Kaye tendency had a distinct analysis on civil rights, derived from the theory of ""revolutionary integrationism,"" and took a more sympathetic towards China as a worker's state than the SWP.

The Freedom Socialist Party was founded in 1966, and had a differing analysis from the SWP's on black nationalist views of Malcolm X and the SWP's orientation toward the labor leaders rather than rank and file workers, and its relationships to the anti-Vietnam War movement, and its dismissive attitude toward the emerging feminist movement. The FSP advocated class solidarity between black and white workers, centered their revolutionary analysis around women's emancipation, and urged the anti-war movement to support the socialist, anti-colonial aims of the Vietnamese Revolution. FSP leaders Clara Fraser (1923–1998) and Gloria Martin (1916–1995) built on the socialist analysis of women's oppression to create a Leninist party that is ""socialist-feminist"" in ideology and practice. The party views the liberation struggles of women, people of color and sexual minorities (such as gay people) as intrinsic to working-class revolt, and it looks to these specially-oppressed sectors of society to provide revolutionary leadership. Women comprise a predominant part of the party leadership. Overall, membership is diverse and is composed of all genders and races. The party characterizes its National Comrades of Color Caucus as offering the party's diverse ranks of people of color an opportunity to work together as a team to grow as leaders and provide direction for the party's work in people of color movements.

The party has branches in a number of U.S. cities, as well as one in Melbourne, Australia. The Freedom Socialist newspaper is produced six times a year. Red Letter Press publishes books and pamphlets for the party. The FSP is affiliated with Radical Women, which is an autonomous socialist feminist organization. [Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freedom_Socialist_Party]"																		
"Freese, James (Labor organizer)"		James Freese papers	"James ""Jim"" Freese was an organizer for the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Local 46 organizing program aimed at recruiting underrepresented communities. Freese was involved in a Local 46 election on the proposal in 1986 on whether members would fund the campaign at the rate of 25 cents per hour per member. The proposal passed 69% to 31%."																		
"Friedheim, Robert L."		Robert Friedheim Seattle General Strike Collection	"Born in 1934, Robert L. Friedheim is the author of"																		
"Gallacci, John"		John Gallacci papers	"John David Gallacci (1901-1982) was a charter member of the International Longhoremen's Association, Local 38-86 (Port Angeles, Washington). Gallacci served as Secretary Treasurer before retiring and took a withdrawal in 1952. Gallacci participated in the maritime strikes of 1934 and 1936-1937, and eventually became Secretary-Treasurer of Local 38-86."																		
"George, Earl, 1894-1985"		Earl George papers and photographs	"Earl George (1894-1985) of the International Longshore and Warehouse Union, Local 9 (Seattle) dedicated his life to tireless work on behalf of the ILWU and progressive causes, most passionately in the struggle to end racial discrimination.

George was born in Denver in 1894. He once said that “growing up Black in this country gives you a pretty good political education.” Early on, the struggles of Denver’s Black community and the violent Colorado miners’ strikes shaped his thinking. George studied math and chemistry at the University of Denver before being drafted into the segregated Army in 1917 and sent to Fort Lewis in the Puget Sound. George arrived in time to participate in the Seattle General Strike of 1919. Sixty-five thousand workers in Seattle walked out in solidarity with 35,000 shipyard workers who were immersed in a struggle for wage increases. The action shut down the entire city.

Like other African Americans, George was excluded from many jobs as well as many unions. In the 1920s and 1930s, he worked in a number of low paid, non-unionized jobs in the service sector, peppered with periods of unemployment. He found work as a steward aboard coastwise vessels, where he joined the Industrial Workers of the World, a militant labor union founded in 1905 which rallied under the banner, “An injury to one is an injury to all.”

When the Great Depression hit in 1929, George marched in Seattle’s streets with the Unemployed Citizens League and the Workers’ Alliance, an organization which fought to get collective bargaining rights for people working on Federal projects. He also helped build the Washington Commonwealth Federation and the Washington Pension Union, whose influence in Washington State politics helped pass the state’s first pension bill in 1939. George joined ILWU Local 9 as a warehouseman in 1938. While working as a warehouseman, he continued to dedicate himself to ending discrimination and bettering the lives of workers

In 1948, he worked on a campaign that succeeded in forcing Seattle-area grocery stores to hire African Americans. A dedicated ILWU member, he participated in the 1948 Pacific Coast Strike, and in 1950 became the first black president of Local 9. While serving in local office, George and then ILWU Regional Director Bill Chester (later ILWU International Vice President) were among a number of African American unionists who helped found the National Negro Labor Council (NNLC). A powerful but short-lived labor organization, the NNLC focused its goals on ending racial discrimination in industry and racism in unions. They campaigned to get unions to organize black workers and were successful in getting a number of unions to call for non-discrimination clauses in their labor contracts. Earl George was a survivor of racism and also a strong combatant against it. Like many labor activists of his time, he also faced bitter red baiting

Along with ILWU President Harry Bridges and other members of the union, George was scapegoated for his political views. In the early 1950s, former Communist Party member Barbara Hartle testified at the Velde Committee hearings, part of the House Un-American Activities Committee, and named Earl and his wife Vivian along with over 200 other possible members of the Communist Party.

Earl himself was subpoenaed to appear before the committee to answer whether he was a Party member. He recalled that “the committee was so self-righteous. They were going to save the world from dangerous folks like me. What did I have to say to them? I took the Fifth Amendment and walked out.” Earl George was a friend to legendary performer, political progressive, civil rights activist, and honorary ILWU member Paul Robeson. In 1952, the Seattle City Council barred Robeson from performing at the Civic Auditorium. George came to his aid, organizing protests in Robeson’s support.

He took similar action when the US State Department revoked Robeson’s passport, preventing him from touring outside the US because of his political beliefs. Lonnie Nelson, a longtime Seattle- area activist and member of ILWU Auxiliary #3 who was close to George, stated that he “was one of the people in the ILWU who represented a wide understanding of life and industry. He was a working class intellectual.”

George remained with Local 9 until 1961, when he retired from work. However, retirement did not mean an end to his commitment to the ILWU and labor and civil rights activism. As soon as he left the active workforce, George became a committed and active member of the Seattle Pensioners Association, where he variously served as Trustee, Secretary, and Secretary-Treasurer.

George was integral in organizing freedom schools during the school boycott to protest segregation in 1966. He also became a well-known photographer, chronicling union picket lines, demonstrations, and rallies for social justice through his camera’s lens. The ILWU International appointed him as a correspondent/photographer for the Dispatcher, and a number of his images appeared in the paper in the 1970s and 1980s. In an interview taken shortly before his death, George stated that “for ninety years I’ve been outraged by injustice wherever it rears its ugly head. All the movements I’ve been part of had one important goal: a little more bread, slightly thicker broth, and a bigger piece of the pie for everyone.”

(Source: ILWU Dispatcher ""Earl George, Civil Rights crusader from ILWU Local 9"" http://www.ilwu.org/a-bigger-piece-of-the-pie-for-everyone-earl-george-civil-rights-crusader-from-ilwu-local-9)"																		
"Gibson, Harold J., 1913-1984"		Harold J. Gibson papers	"Harold J. Gibson was an important leader in the history of the International Association of Machinists, and an influential figure in labor politics, both in the Pacific Northwest and nationally. Born in Idaho in 1913, he moved to Washington State as a child, eventually graduating from Lake Washington High School in Kirkland, WA in 1931. After graduation, Gibson joined the Army for a time before beginning work at Boeing in 1936. In 1941, he was elected a Business Representative of his local District Lodge 751, and in 1943, a short two years later, he was elected District President, a position he would hold for the next 13 years. During World War II, Gibson reenlisted, taking a leave of absence from his post to serve as a sergeant in Patton’s Third Army. In his tenure after the war, he led a successful strike in 1948, ended government freezes on aircraft workers’ wages, helped the district win its first all-inclusive health and welfare plan, and significantly increased union membership. In 1956, Gibson was elected to nationwide office as a General Vice President of the International Association of Machinists, and held the position through the mid-1960s. Gibson was influential not only as a labor leader, but as a political figure as well. He was well connected with longtime state Senators Warren Magnuson and Henry ""Scoop"" Jackson, Governor Al Rosellini, and Bill Boeing. He was an active participant in the Democratic Party, and sat on many committees and commissions. Harold Gibson passed away in 1984 at the age of 71."																		
"Gilman, Herman"		Herman Gilman collection on farmworker organizing in Washington state	"Herman Gilman is a labor activist, union member, and officer who has worked as an organizer for the American Federation of State, Municipal, and County Employees (AFSCME), volunteered with Jobs with Justice, and serves as a member of the King County Central Labor Council."																		
"Gorman, Robert, 1953 February 11-"		"Robert ""Bob"" Gorman papers"	"Gorman was a shop steward for the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Local 46--a maritime electrician's union."																		
"Graphic Communications International Union. Local 767M (Seattle, Wash.)"		"Graphic Communications International Union, Local 767M records"	"Labor organization of the printing industry began as early as 1836, with the first meeting of the National Typographical Society, later renamed the International Typographical Union (ITU) in Washington, D.C. However, it wasn’t until the late 1800s that mechanization transformed the printing industry into a full-scale trade with craft specialization. Newspaper printing and commercial printing became distinct trades. By the turn of the century several separate printing unions had emerged or seceded from the ITU, including the International Printing Pressmen Union of North America (IPPU) in 1897 and the Amalgamated Lithographers of America (ALA) in 1915. Union membership flourished in the first half of the 20th century, and the unions were able to operate alone. As union membership declined in the later half of century, a series of mergers occurred. The International Printing and Graphic Communications Union (IPGCU) resulted in 1973 from the merger of the IPPU and the International Stereotypers’ and Electroplaters’ Union (IS&EU). In 1983, the IPGCU merged with the Graphic Arts International Union (GAIU) to form the Graphic Communications International Union (GCIU). In 2005, the GCIU decided to merge with the 1.1 million member Teamster union.

The first printing union in Seattle was the International Brotherhood of Bookbinders (IBB) in 1900. Seven years later, the Seattle Web Printing Pressmen & Assistants’s Union No. 26 was formed. In 1963, Local No. 26 merged with five other Washington printers’ unions to create the Washington state Joint Crafts Council. GCIU branch 767-M was the result of the 1985 merger of PH & PPU Local 50, GCIU Local 26N and GCIU Local 530M. In 1996, GCIU Local 292-M of Portland, Oregon merged with GCIU 767-M. Additionally, between 2002 and 2003, GCIU branches in Bremerton (367-M), Olympia (182-C) and Aberdeen (262-C) merged with Local 767-M, further strengthening the Seattle branch. In 2005, 767-M merged with the Teamster Union. 767-M still exists today."																		
Rosalinda Guillen	Q100153037	Guide to the Rosalinda Guillén and Joseph Moore papers	"Rosalinda Guillén was born in Texas, grew up in Mexico, and moved to Washington State with her family at age 10 in 1960, working as part of the migrant farm labor community in the northwest for much of the next decade. She then worked at Skagit State Bank for 16 years, but quit only four years before she was eligible to retire in order to organize farm labor for the United Farm Workers of America (UFW).

Guillén's training as a community organizer came from being recruited by the Rainbow Coalition to mobilize support in Washington State for Reverend Jesse Jackson’s 1988 presidential campaign. It was through that work that she learned about farm workers who were organizing at Chateau Ste. Michelle, Washington’s largest winery, and got so involved that she became one of the campaign’s lead organizers. From from Fall of 1993 to December 5, 1995, she ran the grassroots worker organizing campaign, which resulted in the first union contract for farm workers in Washington state.

Following that victory, Guillén went on to serve in a number of high-level UFW organizing jobs, including the coordinator of a strawberry-picker organizing drive in California's Salinas Valley, and the national organization's Northwest Regional Director, Policy Director, Executive Board Member, and finally National Vice-President. Following her work for the UFW, she served as the Executive Director of La Unión del Pueblo Entero (LUPE), a non-profit organization founded by Cesar Chavez.

Currently, Guillén serves as the Affirmative Action Chair of the Whatcom County Democrats, and is the co-founder of and Executive Director for Community to Community Development (C2C), a “a place-based, grassroots organization committed to creating alliances in order to strengthen local and global movements towards social, economic and environmental justice” in Bellingham, Washington.

[Rosalinda Guillén nació en Texas y creció en México. A los 10 años en el año 1960, se mudó al estado de Washington con su familia, donde trabajaba como parte de la comunidad de trabajadores agrícolas migrantes en el noroeste por mucha de la próxima década. Luego trabajó para Skagit State Bank por 16 años, dejando ese trabajo sólo 4 años antes de que fuera elegible para retirarse para organizar trabajadores agrícolas con United Farm Workers of America (UFW).

Guillén fue reclutada y entrenada como organizadora comunitaria por Rainbow Coalition para movilizar soporte en el estado de Washington para la campaña presidencial del Reverendo Jesse Jackson en 1988. Fue por ese trabajo que aprendió Guillén de los trabajadores agrícolas quienes estaban organizando en Chateau Ste. Michelle, la bodega de vinos mas grande en Washington. Llegó a involucrarse tanto que llegó a ser una organizadora principal de la campaña. Desde el otoño 1993 hasta el 5 de diciembre 1995, ella manejo la campaña de organizar el base de trabajadores que resultó en el primer contrato para trabajadores agrícolas en el estado de Washington.

Siguiendo esa victoria, Guillén pasó a servir en varios trabajos de alto nivel con UFW, incluyendo como coordinadora del empujo para organizar recolectores de fresas en el Valle de Salinas en California, Directora Regional del Noroeste al nivel nacional, Directora de Póliza, Miembra de la Junta Ejecutiva, y finalmente como Vicepresidente Nacional. Siguiendo su trabajo con UFW, ella sirvió como Directora Ejecutiva de La Unión del Pueblo Entero (LUPE), una organización sin fines de lucro fundado por Cesar Chavez.

Ahora Guillén sirve como Presidente de Acción Afirmativa de los Democratas de Whatcom County y es la Co-Fundadora y Directora Ejecutiva de Community to Community Development (C2C), una “organización de base local comprometido a crear alianzas para fortalecer los movimientos locales y globales hacia justicia social, económica y ambiental” en Bellingham, Washington.]"																		
"Gundlach, Jean"		Jean Gundlach papers	"For thirty years Jean Gundlach served as administrative assistant of the International Longshore and Warehouse Union Coast Committee, working closely with ILWU President Harry Bridges.

Gundlach was born in Missouri and moved to Seattle in the 1940s. In 1946 she began work as secretary of the Committee for Maritime Unity, and later worked for the United Fisherman and Allied Workers of America (UFAWA). When the UFAWA merged with the ILWU in the 1960s, Gundlach went to work for the ILWU and Harry Bridges.

Throughout her life, Gundlach was devoted to progressive causes, working with migrant farm workers in the 1950s and even leading a walkout at the ILWU when Bridges and other officers treated staff unfairly. In the 1990s Gundlach was instrumental in obtaining a formal apology from the University of Washington to the victims of the Canwell Committee trials. In 1992 she had a major role in the creation of the Harry Bridges Chair in Labor Studies, and in 2008 was awarded the Harry Bridges Center for Labor Studies’ Robert Duggan Distinguished Supporter of Labor Studies Award. Jean Gundlach passed away December 11, 2009."																		
"Gurtiza, Richard"		Richard Gurtiza collection on Asian Pacific American Labor Alliance	"Richard Gurtiza is a Filipino American labor union activist and union officer originally from Wapato, Washington. Gurtiza is president of Region 37, Inlandboatman's Union of the Pacific, the marine division of the International Longshre and Warehouse Union. The union represents Alaska cannery workers, who from the 1930s onwards were largely Filipino Americans and Asian Americans. Gurtiza became a member of Local 37 in 1977 and became Regional Director of the IBU 1993.

Gurtiza was born in the small farming community of Wapato, Washington in the 1950s. Gurtiza was a founder of the local chapter of the Asian Pacific American Labor Alliance (APALA), an American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations constituency organization for Asian American and Pacific Islander labor union members. Gurtiza was also on the national Executive Board of APALA

In the late 1970s, Gurtiza was part of a rank and file reform movement of activist Local 37 cannery workers to reform the union and fight for better working conditions. Gurtiza worked with Silme Domingo and Gene Viernes—the leaders of the Alaska Cannery Workers Association—to build the reform movement. After Domingo and Viernes were murdered in 1981, Gurtiza and other reformers won leadership positions and transformed Local 37.

Gurtiza remains active in the IBU/ILWU, the King County Labor Council, and the Washington State Labor Council."																		
"Hammer, George, 1950-"		George Hammer papers	"George Hammer was a lineworker for Seattle City Light who, when working as apprenticeship coordinator, developed improvements to City Light training programs in the the early 1980s. Hammer had spent almost two years getting reconstructive surgery after a 1978 accident that caused severe burns to his hands. He then had to fight to regain a skilled job with City Light. Hammer eventually went into the Safety Department, and then became secretary to the apprenticeship committee. By 1981, Hammer had been assigned to come up with specific recommendations for City Light's apprenticeship program. He researched and developed apprenticeship training methods that overcame some of the biases common in training methods in effect at the time, and which had the effect of making it extremely difficult for women to qualify. These methods were later adopted by the utility."																		
University of Washington Harry Bridges Center for Labor Studies	Q99514413	Harry Bridges Center for Labor Studies Union Charters collection	"The Harry Bridges Center for Labor Studies is jointly housed in the departments of Political Science and History at the University of Washington. The Center honors the late Harry Bridges, one of the preeminent labor leaders in the U.S. Supporting research, teaching, and community outreach, the Center focuses on labor's contribution to society, and develops labor studies, broadly conceived to include working men and women everywhere, as a central concern in higher education."																		
"Hatten, Barry, 1917-2008"		C. T. (Barry) Hatten papers	"Canterbury Theodore ""Barry"" Hatten was born August 24, 1917, in Indiana, and grew up in Alaska, where his missionary parents ran an orphanage. Despite a childhood case of tuberculosis of the bone in one leg that prevented him from enlisting in World War II, he was a longshoreman in Alaska and San Francisco and worked on the railroad in Alaska. He studied at DePauw University in Indiana and the University of Washington, and practiced union, civil rights, and criminal law for 50 years before retirement. Barry Hatten died on August 17, 2008, aged 90. He longshored and worked on the railroad in Alaska in spite of the bad leg. After he received his law degree, he practiced union, civil rights, criminal and poor people's law. During the McCarthy loyalty hearings he defended professors being fired by the University of Washington. His brother-in-law Ralph Gundlach was one of them. He longshored in San Francisco during WWII and later in the fifties. [wsba.org] Barry was married first to Jean Gundlach; then to Louise Seifert with whom he had two sons, John Barry and Charles Theodore; then to Mary Telford Gibson with whom he lived more than forty years. [Island Sounds 2008]"																		
"Hopkinson, E. William, 1875-1956"		Microfilm of E. William Hopkinson papers	"Edwin William Hopkinson (1875-1956) was born in Iola, Kansas. He was a labor activist, farmer, chicken rancher, and chairman of Communist Party of Pierce County, Washington as well as the timber expert of the Autonomous Industrial Colony in Kuznetsk Basin, Kemerovo, Siberia (it was a mining operation). He was a member of the Industrial Workers of the World, and closely associated with the Unemployed Citizens Council of Pierce County, with the Washington Pension Union, and leftist movements. His wife Mary (Bartels) Hopkinson was also an activist in labor movements, especially the Washington Pension Union."																		
(No origination name found.)		Mary and E. William Hopkinson papers																			
"Hopkinson, Mary, 1880-1970"		Mary Hopkinson papers	"Mary Hopkinson (1880-1970) was born Maria Amelia Bartels in Hamburg, Germany. She came to the United States before the turn of the 20th century and married Edwin William Hopkinson in 1903. Mary Hopkinson was heavily involved in the labor movement and was a founding member of the Washington Pension Union."																		
"Huff, Henry P."		Henry P. Huff papers	"Political activist, labor activist. Huff joined the Industrial Workers of the World in 1917 and was a charter member of the Communist Party, USA (CPUSA); serving in Southwest Washington as a member of the District Committee and District Board of the CPUSA, participating in unemployed struggles, the 1934 Pacific Coast Maritime Strike, and the 1935 Lumber Strike. He was a member of the National Committee of the CPUSA from 1944 to 1948. Huff was also a member of the Washington Commonwealth Federation, and a Smith Act trial defendent in the 1953 case United States v. Huff."																		
International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers. District Lodge 751		International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers District Lodge 751 records	"The International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers District Lodge No. 751 traces its origins to the founding of Local Lodge 751 of the International Association of Machinists at the Boeing Airplane Company in 1935. This local union organized Boeing on an industrial rather than craft basis. The first collective bargaining agreement with Boeing was signed July 1, 1936. A union shop was established with the second contract, in 1937. The union was re-organized as District Lodge No. 751 in 1941. It now consists of local lodges 751-A (assembly and production workers), 751-C (machinists), 751-E (electronics workers), 751-F (inspectors, clerks, others), Local 86 (workers in Spokane area), Local 1123 (workers in Wenatchee area and Grand Coulee Dam), and Local 1951 (Richland)."																		
International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers. Lodge 751-A		"International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, Lodge 751-A records"	"International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers Local Lodge No. 751-A, established in 1941, represents assembly and production workers at the Boeing Company."																		
"International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers. Local 46 (Seattle, Wash.)"		"International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Local 46 records"	"The International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers was founded in St. Louis, Missouri in 1890, when a group of electrical workers got together and chartered the National Brotherhood of Electrical Workers Local 5221 under the leadership of its first president, Henry Miller. Local 217 of Seattle, Washington was established in 1901 and ordered defunct in 1908. For six years, dissenting forces within the union caused a split, with each side electing its own officers. The AFL ultimately deemed the McNulty-Collins faction as the legitimate brotherhood. In 1914, the IBEW Local 46 was formed in Seattle with a membership of 250 men of various occupations: inside wiremen, marine wiremen, radio workers and telephone operators that worked in shipyards, industrial areas, uptown Seattle and its vicinity. Over the years the departments of the IBEW grew to include Sound and Communication, Residential, Marine, HVAC, Electronics, Motor Shop, Neon Sign and Maintenance. Current Local 46 jurisdiction includes King, Kitsap, Jefferson and Clallam Counties. Today, Local 46 is composed of over 4,500 members in a variety of craft units as well as over 1200 associate members."																		
"International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers. Local 77 (Seattle, Wash.)"		"International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Local 77 records"																			
Pacific Coast Pensioners Association. Oral History Committee		"Oral history interviews of the International Longshore and Warehouse Union, Pacific Coast Pensioners Association Oral History Project"	"The first pensions dispensed to retiring longshore workers, members of the International Longshore and Warehouse Union, were issued in July 1952. Soon after retiring, many of this first wave of ILWU pensioners organized into regional clubs on the West Coast. At first, they served mainly as fraternal organizations for retired ILWU members and partners to socialize. Soon, however, the activist culture of the ILWU became evident and the clubs began to take action on senior citizens' issues, labor problems and matters relating to the ILWU locals from which they retired. In 1968 those regional ILWU pensioner clubs formed the coastwide Pacific Coast Pensioners Association, calling an organizing convention in September of 1968 with the goal of founding a fraternal organization of ILWU pensioners that would allow them to act with unity as an advocacy as well as a social organization, their official motto becoming ""Retired from the Job But Not From the Struggle"". The PCPA holds an annual convention at a port on the West Coast, with the location changing every year. They also have the unusual position within union retiree organizations of having a member on the ILWU's contract negotiation team during the collective bargaining process to ensure the concerns of retired members are addressed. https://www.ilwu.org/why-the-pacific-coast-pensioners-association/"																		
Independent Media Center	Q1137514	Independent Media Center materials regarding the WTO 1999 Seattle Ministerial Conference protests	"The Independent Media Center is an an international network of journalists that report on political and social issues. It was founded during the Seattle anti-WTO protests in 1999, employing an open publishing and democratic media process that allows anybody to contribute."																		
Industrial Workers of the World. California Office		Industrial Workers of the World California Office records	"Radical labor organization formed in Chicago in 1905 by the Western Federation of Miners, other labor groups, Eugene Debs and Daniel De Leon. They chose to use a strictly non-political approach and to organize the disenfranchised. Post war suppression weakened the organization, but it still exists, but with few members."																		
Instructors' Association (University of Washington)		Instructors' Association records	"Recognizing the need for an organization to investigate issues facing University of Washington faculty, the Instructors’ Association was founded by faculty with the support of President Henry Suzzallo at a meeting on October 22, 1919. The association served as a liaison between faculty, including members of the American Federation of Teachers Union, Local No. 401, and university administration. A Board of Directors of seven annually elected individuals governed the organization and several standing committees were created to research specific issues. Through these investigations, often administered through questionnaires distributed to university faculty, the association would compile reports and make recommendations to the administration based on the results. Major issues explored by the Instructors’ Association include promotions and faculty salaries; faculty’s role in appointment of university presidents; retirement and annuity; sabbatical leave; university personnel policies, including a policy that prohibited married faculty members to both teach at the university; teaching load; cost of living; taxes; state and local funding; university budget and expenditures; tenure; and healthcare and insurance. Although the records stop at year 1947, it is currently unknown when the Instructors' Association officially disbanded."																		
"International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers. Lodge 751-E (Seattle, Wash.)"		"International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, Lodge 751E records"	"IAM 751-E is local lodge of the International Association of Machinists, District 751. Chartered by the District in 1961, the local's membership is comprised of skilled electronics workers at Boeing."																		
"International Association of Machinists. Hope Lodge 79 (Seattle, Wash.)"		International Association of Machinists Hope Lodge 79 records																			
"International Brotherhood of Boilermakers, Iron Shipbuilders, Blacksmiths, Forgers, and Helpers of America. Local 104 (Seattle, Wash.)"		"International Brotherhood of Boilermakers, Iron Shipbuilders, Blacksmiths, Forgers, and Helpers of America, Local 104 (Seattle, Washington) records"	"Labor organization, Seattle, Washington. Prior to July 1953 the organization's name was the International Brotherhood of Boiler Makers, Iron Ship Builders, and Helpers of America, Local 104 (Seattle)."																		
International Brotherhood of Teamsters	Q655029	"International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Chauffeurs, Warehousemen, and Helpers of America records"																			
"International Longshoremen's and Warehousemen's Union. Fishermen and Allied Workers Division. Local 3 (Seattle, Wash.)"		International Longshoremen's and Warehousemen's Union Fishermen and Allied Workers Division Local 3 records	"Union composed of several dozen local units. Two predecessors of the Longshoremen's and Warehousemen's union were the United Fishermen's Union of the Pacific, Puget Sound District, and International Fishermen and Allied Workers of America, Pacific District, Local 3 (IFAWA). The IFAWA includes about 15 small local unions as well as larger member unions such as the Alaska Fishermen's Unions .The IFAWA merged with ILWU in 1950. It was active with external organizations such as the Maritime Federation of the Pacific.

A detailed history of the UFU and IFAWA was created by Leo Baunach for the online Waterfront Workers History Project. A link, active as of 8/1/2016, can be found "																		
"International Longshoremen's and Warehousemen's Union. Local 1 (Raymond, Wash.)"		International Longshoremen's and Warehousemen's Union Local 1 records	"In 1937 the International Longshoremen's Association Local 38-92 (AFL) became the International Longshoremen's and Warehousemen's Union (ILWU) Local 1, the first CIO local of the ILWU chartered in the state of Washington. ILWU Local 1 was based in Raymond, Washington (on Willapa Bay), and existed until it merged with Aberdeen Local 24 in 1976."																		
"International Organization of Masters, Mates, and Pilots. Local 6"		"International Organization of Masters, Mates and Pilots, Local 6 records"	"Union made up of licensed ship officers in Seattle, Washington."																		
International Typographical Union	Q6054069	International Typographical Union records	"The International Typographical Union was founded on May 5, 1852 in Cincinnati, Ohio and was the oldest union in the United States to continuously operate into the late 20th century. Originally titled the National Typographical Union, the organization became the ITU in 1869 after entering into an affiliation with Canadian printing trade unions. The ITU was at the forefront of progressive initiatives within the labor movement, lobbying for an eight hour work day and condemning Sunday work. In 1987, members of the ITU approved affiliation with the Communication Workers of America. After the merger was completed, the CWA created a new Printing, Publishing and Media Workers (PPMWS) Sector in recognition of the distinct nature of the work these union members perform."																		
International Woodworkers of America	Q6054300	International Woodworkers of America records	"Already source of labor unrest for several decades, the Pacific Northwest lumber and sawmill industry of the 1930s was in the midst of inter-union rivalry. The industry was dominated by single men working in remote and often inhospitable conditions. Support for communism was particularly strong in mill towns and logging camps populated with unskilled immigrant labor. Many of these Pacific Northwest woodworkers gathered in Portland in 1936 and formed the Federation of Woodworkers. Two years later, they opted to affiliate with the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) and became the International Woodworkers of America (IWA). Harold Pritchett was elected their first president. Pritchett had very strong ties to the Communist Party, although he consistently denied that he was a member. This affiliation, shared by many members of the IWA was a source of contention with the American Federation of Labor (AFL) and the US government. At first, this manifested as a struggle for IWA representation of woodworkers in the region. The AFL’s timber union, which eventually became the Lumber and Sawmill Workers (LSW), competed furiously for members. As a result IWA membership fell from about 40,000 at its first convention in 1937 to about 20,000 at its second in 1938. These early years were difficult for the IWA and marred by a disputes with the AFL timber union. Pritchett was directly affected when he was denied a permanent visa to the United States in 1940, which forced him to step down as leader of the union as he could not conduct business without access to both countries. However, he continued to work in Canada, quickly becoming president of District #1.

Turmoil persisted for much of the IWA's first two decades. Yet in spite of this the IWA grew rapidly. Wartime labor policies helped greatly. The Taft-Hartley Act (1948) caused the Canadian districts to attempt to disaffiliate, however this was defeated and they remained a part of the IWA until 1987. After the period of late 1940s anti-labor legislation, the IWA experienced great success. Several regionals convened for the first time in convention during the late 1950s and early 1960s. Union membership reached its peak in 1977 with 112,000. The 1980s were comparably difficult with industry-wide losses in union bargaining power. The IWA dissolved into two national unions in 1987.

A list of IWA Conventions with officers and nominations from 1936 to 1973 (with the exception of 1954, 1956, 1959-1962, 1964, 1970, 1972) can be found in folder 1/3."																		
"International Woodworkers of America. Local 3-101 (Everett, Wash.)"		International Woodworkers of America Local 3-101 records	"AFL-CIO labor union representing mill and timber workers.

The International Woodworkers of America was founded in 1937 and chartered by the Congress of Industrial Organizations the same year. Since 1935 the Sawmill and Timber Workers had been organized by the American Federation of Labor under the leadership of the Brotherhood of Carpenters. However, the woodworkers' increasing dislike of Carpenter leadership and AFL trade union organization led to the break in 1937. From 1940 Local 101 represented workers in the Everett Weyerhaeuser mills and Eclipse Lumber Company. Unions which merged with Local 101 were other members active in the Snohomish Industrial Union Council, local coordinating arm of the CIO. Local 18 of Cannery Workers' branch of Internatinal Fishermen and Allied Workers of America, was also a member of the SIUC. Other local unions that merged with it included branches from Anacortes, Bellingham, Sedro Woolley, and Sultan, Washington. When Districts 2 and 3 of the union merged in 1953, the Everett local's disignation changed from 2-101 to 23-101; in 1959 it became Local 3-101.

The IWA was in competition with the AFL unions for representation of woodworkers until the AFL-CIO merger in 1955. After the industry-wide shift to the IWA, the AFL locals made gains in Everett, but the big Weyerhaeuser mills had not signed a contract with either union until 1940. In that year during the AFL strike the IWA capitalized on increasing discontent with the Brotherhood of Carpenter's leadership to organize the Weyerhaeuser mills. On October 31, 1940 the IWA signed contracts covering those mills and, in effect, pulled far ahead of the Sawmill and Timber Workers in Everett. Besides the Weyerhaeuser Mills, Local 101 also represented the Eclipse Lumber Company and, after 1953, a new Kraft mill. Since its membership was mostly in the large mills, it had greater stability than other locals. Representing Weyerhaeuser employees enhanced its position since other companies followed Weyerhaeuser's example.

Local 101 was a member of the Snohomish County Industrial Union Council (CIO), which also included the Sultan IWA local and Everett locals of the ILWU, IBU, Cannery Workers and United Construction Workers. Certain issues are common to the Local 101 records and the SIUC subgroup, such as support for the formation of a third party in 1948, support for left wing labor leaders, and repeal of the Taft-Hartley law."																		
International Longshoremen's and Warehousemen's Union. Local 9		"International Longshoremen's and Warehousemen's Union, Local 9 records"	"International Longshore and Warehouse Union, Local 9 is a local union that represents port workers at Seattle-Tacoma International aiport. A part of their jurisdiction was formerly Port of Seattle warehouses, but by the late 2000s, those contracts were no longer in place."																		
"International Union of Mine, Mill, and Smelter Workers. Local 25 (Tacoma, Wash.)"		"International Union of Mine, Mill and Smelter Workers, Local 25 records"	"The International Union of Mine, Mill and Smelter Workers (formerly the Western Federation of Miners) was formed in 1916, and weathered repeated accusations of Communism against its leadership during the 1940s and 1950s; in 1967 it merged with the United Steelworkers of America. Local 25 of the International Union of Mine, Mill, and Smelter Workers was organized in 1933 by workers at the Tacoma Smelter of the American Smelting and Refining Company. It continued as Local 25 of the United Steelworkers of America when the International merged with the United Steelworkers. The Tacoma Smelter, located on Commencement Bay in the company town of Ruston, Washington, had been in existence since1889. It was founded by William R. Rust as the Tacoma Smelting and Refining Company, and began operating in 1890. In 1905 the smelter was purchased by the American Smelting and Refining Company. The facility was originally used to smelt and refine lead, but in 1912 it was converted to a copper smelter and refinery."																		
"Johnson, Gordon"		Gordon Johnson papers	"Gordon Johnson was a labor union member and officer, who was a member and officer of the United Brotherhood of Carpenters, Local 2653 (Millworkers) and in various locals and councils of the International Woodworkers of America; the Lumber and Sawmill Workers, Local 94 (Everett, WA).

The International Woodworkers of America (IWA) was an industrial union of lumber and sawmill workers, timber transportation workers and affiliated workers formed in 1937 when members of the Sawmill and Timber Workers’ Union division of the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America disaffiliated their local unions and formed their own international union. The IWA later affiliated with the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO)."																		
"Johnston, Bill (Union organizer)"		Bill Johnston papers	"William “Bill” Johnston is a retired staff organizer of the United Food and Commercial Workers in Washington state. Bill Johnston has worked in unions in both the private and public sectors. He spent 30 years as an organizer, local union president, international trustee and district council president for five northwestern states, and served on the health and welfare and pension boards of several unions. He retired in 2003 and lives in Tacoma, Washington. He is a member of the National Writers Union (Pacific Northwest Chapter)."																		
Katipunan Ng Mga Demokratikong Pilipino		Katipunan ng mga Demokratikong Pilipino (KDP) [Union of Democratic Filipinos] records	"The Union of Democratic Filipinos (KDP) is an organization that emerged in the Filipino American Community in 1973. As an organization the KDP embraced the dual goal of establishing socialism in the US, as well as supporting the National Democratic Movement led by the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP). A central part of the mission of the KDP was fighting the regime of Philippines dictator Ferdinand Marcos, who had established marshall law when he seized power and represssed leftists and trade unionists in the Phillippines. Two of the KDP's Seattle members, Gene Viernes and Silme Domingo, were assassinated for their attempts to counter the Marcos regime and reform the Cannery Workers Union is Seattle. Marcos was later found guilty of orchestrating the attacks and found criminally liable in a US court."																		
"Keller, David (David E.)"		David Keller Papers	David Keller is an archivist and historian of jazz and labor history. He is the co-author of 																		
"Kelsey, Norma L."		Norma L. Kelsey papers	"Labor activist, social justice activist, feminist, and union member. Kelsey was a member or officer of various labor and social justice organizations, including the Office and Professional Employees International Union Local 8, the King County Labor Council; El Centro de la Raza; Mothers for Police Accountability, the King County Union Retirees Council, the Puget Sound Alliance for Retired Americans, and the Coalition of Labor Union Women, among others. Kelsey was also involved in the work of the Seattle City Council's World Trade Organization Accountability Review Committee as a member of its Citizens Panel on Planning and Preparedness."																		
"King County Nurses Association (King County, Wash.)"		King County Nurses Association records	"The King County Nurses Association (KCNA) is a professional association of registered nurses, established in 1903 as the King County Graduate Nurses Association and renamed in 1951. It is affiliated on the state and national levels with the Washington State Nurses Association and the American Nurses Association. While the Washington State Nurses Association, of which KCNA is affiliated, functions as both a professional association and a union that collectively bargains for its members, KCNA functions primarily as a professional association that engages in advocacy work. KCNA also maintains a registry of its members and makes referrals to hospitals in need of nursing staff and provides continuing education opportunities for its members, collaborates with other health organizations in King County, and is active in lobbying activities.

Directors of the KCNA: "																		
"Kolloen, Peter"		"Peter Kolloen collection on Elias ""Dutch"" Shultz"	Peter Kolloen is a member of the Pacific Coast Pensioners Association of the International Longshore and Warehouse Union.																		
"Krasnowsky, Frank"		Frank Krasnowsky papers	"Frank Krasnowsky is a labor, political, and civil rights activist. Krasnowsky was an organizer and health and safety committee officer for the United Steelworkers of America in the Bethlehem Steel plant in Tacoma, Washington. There, he worked with other union activists including Eugene Dennet to make the existing union contract more powerful for the union members at Bethlehem--particulary in regards to health and safety.

At one time, Krasnowsky was married to fellow socialist Clara Fraser. They divorced, and she left the SWP to form the Freedom Socialist Party.

Krasnowsky's mother was a Jewish and Yiddish anarchist and his father, Harry Paxton Howard, was from an old American family and a member of the Industrial Workers of the World. His parents met in Chicago, where his mother was a garment worker and they were part of the same IWW/anarchist circles. When they left the US together in 1917 for Russia to aid the Russian Revolution, and en route Frank took his mother's name--Krasnowsky--rather than his father's to allow them to get back into Russia more easily. Instead of staying in Russia, they lived in Yokahama, Japan for 4 years where Krasnowsky's father worked as an editor of the newspapers Russia Today and New Russia.

Krasnowsky is also a member of the local Jewish American community. He co-chaired the Seattle chapter of the National Yiddish Club and performed as part of the musical duo Chutzpah. He is also the published author of short stories and poems."																		
"Lambert, George W., -1971"		George Lambert recordings	"George Lambert was the administrative secretary of the Seattle-Tacoma Newspaper Guild, Local 82 (later called the Pacific Northwest Newspaper Guild) from 1955 until his death on May 16th, 1971. Lambert was a native of Dyersburg, Tennessee. He came to the Puget Sound area before World War II and worked for Puget Sound Power and Light and The Seattle Time circulation department from 1943-1955. He was the chief negotiator of a team negotiating a contract with The Seattle Times and The Seattle Post-Intelligencer at the time of his death."																		
"Lannge, Nils, 1906-1995"		Nils and Evelyn Lannge papers	"Nils Gustaf Adolf Lannge was a member of International Longshore and Warehouse Union, Local 10 (San Francisco), a longlong union activist, and a member of the Communist Party. Lannge was a friend of ILWU President Harry Bridges"																		
"Ledwich, Leo L."		Leo L. Ledwich papers	"In 1937 Leo Ledwich was Secretary-Treasurer of Retail Clerks International Protective Association, Local 174, in Seattle and a vice president of the Retail Clerks International Protective Association. In that year there was a dispute between a number of locals, organized under the name of New Era Committee, and a faction within the International."																		
Left Bank Books	Q27991542	Left Bank Books Collective records	"Left Bank Books was founded in 1973 by a group of workers who split off from the University District’s Red and Black Books to form their own collective bookstore in the Pike Place Market. The two projects continued as separate but mutually supportive projects until the mid 1990s, when Red and Black closed. For much of the 1980s and 1990s, the Left Bank Books Collective expanded to include two other projects: AKA Books, a used bookstore in Seattle's University District, as well as a wholesale distribution and mail order project known as Left Bank Distribution. Neither of these projects exists today due to financial problems and rental situations in Seattle.

Left Bank is collectively owned and operated by its workers, and has been since its inception. As an anarchist collective, Left Bank has no bosses or managers. Decisions are made in bi-monthly collective meetings based on a consensus process. Left Bank Books still operates out of a Pike Place Market storefront.

Left Bank Books was founded as a small collective. In the late 1990s, Left Bank Books became registered as a federal corporation so that in the event of financial difficulty at the store, individual employees would not be held financially responsible. Left Bank Books is not federally registered as a non-profit.

Left Bank Distribution, or LBD, was a project started by the Left Bank Books collective in 1980 and ended in 2001. LBD was a book distribution project that provided direct mail-order service of radical book, zines and magazines to individuals and bookstores during the 1980s and 1990s. LBD was a wholesale distributor of radical and alternative books, pamphlets, magazines and zines to independent bookstores, tabling projects, libraries and other organizations, and individuals, mail order catalog. LBD offered one of the largest selections of anarchist & radical books in the world. Corporatization of the bookstore and distribution industry beginning in the late 1990s led to the proliferation of chain bookstores and put many independent bookstores out of business.

Source: https://www.leftbankbooks.com/aboutUs.php#history"																		
"Lelli, Phil, 1929-2004"		Phil Lelli papers	"Philip Martin Lelli (1929-2004) was a longshoreman, union activist, local philanthropist, and past president of the ILWU Local 23, in Tacoma, Washington.

Born in Tacoma on December 4, 1929, Lelli was raised in the Edgewood Area. His parents, Martin (nicknamed ""Barney"") and Mary Ballard, ran Lelli's Grocery. He attended Edgemont School (now Edgewood), Fife High School (graduating in 1947), and Pacific Lutheran University. In 1953 he married B. Joann Williams and had 5 sons.

Lelli joined the Tacoma area longshoremen union in September 1956 after spending a few years in the construction industry in various parts of Washington and Alaska. In 1961 he took his first gear locker job at Rothschild Stevedoring, later known at Jones Washington Stevedoring Company, with T. A. ""Tiny"" Thronson in the Tacoma shop. Lelli was elected president of the ILWU Local 23, a position which he held for 17 inconsecutive years, from 1966-1969, 1971-1975, and 1977-1986. According to one biographical document, he attended his first ILWU Longshore, Shipclerk, and Walking Boss Caucus in 1966. Lelli served on various ILWU committees, including the Coast Negotiating Committee (elected in 1989), and was appointed to the Pacific Coast Safety Committee as a representative of the Washington area. He also served as an ILWU delegate to New Zealand and Australia in 1983.

Lelli's other activities included serving on the Washington State Advisory Council on International Trade and Development from 1983-1985 and serving as an appointed Port of Tacoma commissioner beginning in 1992. He also was a member of the Tacoma Propeller Club and served as president in 1977, the first member from labor to ever hold that office in the national club history."																		
"Lembcke, Jerry, 1943-"		Jerry Lembcke papers	"Jerry Lembcke is a sociologist who has done extensive research on the International Woodworkers of America; he did a PhD thesis, "																		
"Litchman, Claire"		Claire Litchman papers																			
"Loewe, R. (Rheinhold)"		Rheinhold Loewe papers	"Rheinhold Loewe joined the Machinists Union, Hope Lodge 79 circa 1909 and served as a page for Samuel Gompers at the 1914 convention and William Green at the 1942 convention, both held in Seattle, Washington. Loewe later became a clerk in the King County Court System. He also served as the Machinists Union Auditor during the 1920's and was an active member of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees."																		
"Magden, Ronald"		Ronald Magden papers	"Labor historian, professor, and author from Tacoma, Washington. Magden researched and wrote several books, mainly in partnership with labor organizations in Tacoma and Seattle. Magden's books include 

WASHINGTON LONGSHOREMEN. In the last two decades of the 19th century longshore labor organizations on the Pacific Coast were in flux, with several charters for local labor organizations appearing, disappearing and re-affiliating under various associations. This lasted into 1902, when the International Longshoremen’s Association (ILA) became the dominant labor organization in Washington ports until 1937. In that year, several ILA locals re-chartered themselves under the International Longshoremen’s and Warehousemen’s Union (ILWU). This reorganization was a response to the growing movement towards industrial unionism. The ILWU had chosden to affiliate with the newly formed Congress of Industrial Unions (CIO), while the ILA kept its ties to the craft union oriented American Federation of Labor (AFL). Seattle ILA local 38-12 was included in this reorganization; it became and remains ILWU local 19. Companies employing waterfront labor also organized to counter the forces in labor. 1908 saw the formation of the Waterfront Employers’ Union, which in 1920 changed its name to the Waterfront Employers of Seattle. In 1934 a statewide organization – the Waterfront Employers of Washington – appeared. This was followed by the creation of the Waterfront Employers’ Association of the Pacific Coast in 1937. Also present during this time was the Northwest Waterfront Employers’ Association – which included companies from all over the Pacific coast of the U.S. and Canada. The 1910’s saw a number of waterfront labor disputes and a major strike in 1916. This period of time was a peak in labor activity and organization, due in a great part to the local influence of the Industrial Workers of the World (“Wobblies”) and to the continuing global influence of the Russian Revolution. The next and largest west-coast waterfront strike took place in 1934 in the midst of the Great Depression. This labor action was a general strike of all types of waterfront labor in all of the major west-coast ports. During this strike tensions between the strikers and the employers, scabs and police escalated to violent clashes, including the infamous “Bloody Thursday” (July 5, 1934) confrontation in San Francisco.

WASHINGTON TEAMSTERS. Similarly, the collection of Teamster records also tracks the birth and development of regional (Washington) teamster, driver and chauffer unions, as well as the growth of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters. This organization was founded in the Midwest in the late 1800s. Its influence and reach grew in the last decades of that century, and in the early 1900s Teamster locals were forming on the west coast and throughout Washington state. Washington locals were involved in a 5-year strike 1910-15 and the various labor struggles of the 1930s – often affected by the efforts of longshore and maritime labor organizations.

NEWSPAPER UNIONS PUBLISHING CO.. The Newspaper Unions Publishing Company was formed in 1952 by striking Tacoma News Tribune workers. The company was created to publish a strike paper – The Tacoma Reporter – that was issued during June, July and August of that year. Following this strike, the company fell into inactivity."																		
"Major, Adolph"		Adolph Major collection	"Adolph Major was a member of the Industrial Workers of the World and involved in the Slavic community, serving as a member of the executive board of the American Slavic Benevolent Federation of Washington.

Joining in 1923, Major was a member of the IWW during the agricultural strikes in Washington in 1933 during his time riding the rails. He was also involved in the lumber strike of 1935. Major eventually became an organizer for the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers."																		
Shaun Maloney	Q21605285	Shaun Maloney papers	"Shaun Maloney was a fiery union activist and advocate for workers' rights whose involvement in the labor movement spanned eight decades.

Shaun McGillin Maloney was born on Sept. 10, 1911, in Minneapolis. His natural father deserted the family before Maloney's birth. As a youth he was known as John or Jack Severson, adopting the name of his stepfather. He reverted to using Maloney in about 1936 when he was issued a social security card. He was called Shaun by his longshore associates, but remained Jack to those who had a Minnesota connection and John to a handful of relatives.

Maloney was introduced to labor activism and radical politics as a youth. His mother was a fierce Irish nationalist. His stepfather, a Teamster who was blacklisted after an unsuccessful Teamsters strike in 1917, was an early member of the Industial Workers of the World. The Severson home was the scene of frequent Wobblie gatherings.

Maloney left school after the eighth grade. Through the 1920s and early 1930s, he worked driving delivery wagons—initially horse-drawn wagons and eventually trucks. When hauling work was unavailable, he sailed on the Great Lakes and worked in the fields, following the harvest north from the southern plains to the Dakotas. It was during the late 1920s that Maloney joined the Wobblies and his first union, General Drivers, Helpers and Inside Workers Union (Teamsters) Local 574 of Minneapolis. Through his union activities he became acquainted with noted socialists such as Karl Skoglund and V.R. and Miles Dunne.

In May 1934 Local 574, spurred on by a successful strike against area coal companies, began what was to be a long and bitter general trucking strike. Seven weeks into the strike armed police fired into the crowd of strikers. Two strikers were killed and dozens of others, including Maloney, were injured on what came to be known as ""Bloody Friday."" Martial law was declared and federal mediators were sent in to lead negotiations. The union won the strike and approved a contract in August. Maloney, who was elevated from picket line captain to the negotiation committee after the strike's primary leaders were arrested, appeared on the front page of a local Minneapolis paper casting his vote in favor of the contract.

After the 1934 strikes, Maloney organized truckers in South Dakota, Iowa, and Nebraska. In fall 1937, he joined the drive to organize the then-neglected over-the-road drivers and bring them under a single area contract. As a member of the North Central District Drivers Council, he helped negotiate the first area contract covering an 11-state area and tens of thousands of drivers. The area contract set up the structure that turned the Teamsters from a loose confederation of provincial outposts to a powerful national union.

In the course of a 22-week strike leading up to the contract, a bakery delivery truck traveling across the Iowa-Minnesota border was destroyed, and the company blamed the union. Maloney, who had been assigned to work with Local 383 in Sioux City, Iowa, and several other union organizers closest to the scene were rounded up and charged with interference with interstate commerce. Maloney was convicted and entered the federal penitentiary in Sandstone, Minn., in June 1940.

A draft notice was awaiting Maloney upon his release from prison in Mar. 1942. To avoid fighting in a war that he opposed, Maloney traveled to New York and joined the merchant marine. He found a berth on the 

Maloney returned from Russia in the fall of 1942 and came to the West Coast. After a brief stay in San Francisco, he made his way to Seattle, from where he sailed the relatively safe Alaska run for the duration of the war. After the war Maloney continued sailing throughout the Pacific and took an active part in the Sailors' Union of the Pacific (SUP) until he became involved in the Mahoney Beef in 1949.

John Mahoney was expelled from the SUP in June 1949 for questioning the leadership's attempt to break a strike by the Canadian Seamen's Union, which the leadership viewed as Communist-influenced. Over 30 of his supporters, including Maloney and his half-brother Jim Severson, would be expelled over the course of 12 months. Maloney was not initially part of the so-called Mahoney gang; the collection of a small fund for the family of a deceased shipmate led union leaders to suspect Maloney and his shipmates of financially supporting Mahoney's defense. Maloney became a key member of the Mahoney Defense Committee and helped coordinate the efforts of the expelled sailors who filed suit for reinstatement. The court battles dragged on for several years. Mahoney's case eventually worked its way up to the Washington State Supreme Court, which affirmed the lower court's order of reinstatement. Maloney and his co-plaintiffs also won reinstatement, but were again expelled.

After his expulsion from the SUP, Maloney did not return to sea. He and many of the other expelled sailors found work as longshoremen while contesting their expulsions. Maloney gained membership in the International Longshoremen's and Warehousemen's Union in Apr. 1953. With its reputation for militancy and rank-and-file democracy, the longshore union seemed a good fit for Maloney. He quickly became active in Seattle's Local 19. He was elected vice president of the local in 1956, was appointed to the area committee in 1957 and sat on the Executive Board. He frequently opposed positions taken by ILWU President Harry Bridges and was critical of the controversial ""Mechanization and Modernization"" Agreement of 1960.

In the post-war years, pressure to speed up cargo handling made mechanization an attractive option to shipowners and waterfront employers seeking to increase profitability. Mechanization would naturally result in the loss of waterfront jobs. The longshore union was divided on how to confront this issue. While many members resisted change in the industry, the union leadership concluded that mechanization was inevitable and sought to ameliorate its effects. The M&M agreement allowed shipowners and stevedoring contractors to introduce labor-saving machinery and work practices in return for a guarantee against layoffs and increased wages and benefits.

Maloney was elected president of Local 19 in Dec. 1970 and served five terms, the first person to do so. When Maloney took over as Local 19 president, the ILWU was still dealing with the consequences of the M&M agreement of 1960. Of growing concern to the union was the spread of the employers' practice of hiring ""steady men"" equipment operators who were assigned work outside the normal dispatch procedure. Contract negotiations were at an impasse, and on July 1, 1971, the longshoremen went on strike. Only after a 134-day strike (interrupted by a court-imposed ""cooling off"" period) was a settlement reached. The issue of steady men nevertheless remained a source of tension. In the fall of 1972, Local 19 was embroiled in a dispute locally with employers over hiring of steady men crane operators. The waterfront employers hit the union, and Maloney personally, with a lawsuit accusing the union of an illegal work slowdown.

Maloney retired from the ILWU in 1976, but remained active in union affairs. He regularly attended membership meetings and served as an advisor to the more militant wing of the local union membership. He also remained an active figure in the wider labor movement, in which he was better known for his role in the 1934 Teamsters strike. He cultivated a circle of correspondents around the country and campaigned on behalf of union solidarity.

Maloney died in Seattle on Dec. 19, 1999."																		
Maritime Federation of the Pacific Coast		Maritime Federation of the Pacific Coast convention reports	Labor organization.																		
"Markholt, Ottilie"		Ottilie Markholt papers	"Ottilie Markholt was born on February 25, 1916 in Candle, Alaska. She was an active member of the Pierce County labor movement and published several works on labor unions."																		
"Marmot, Inc. (Seattle, Wash.)"		"Marmot, Inc. records"	"Marmot, Inc. was a worker-self managed reforestation workers' cooperative/collective called. Based in Seattle and Bellingham, Marmot was founded in the mid-1970s, and ultimately dissolved in 1985 at the bottom of the timber industry recession of the mid-1980s. During its history Marmot had around 30 worker-owners, and it was part of a larger network of forestry cooperatives called the Northwest Forestry Workers Association that probably totaled one to two thousand workers."																		
"Mason, Nancy"		Nancy Mason papers	"Nancy Mason began her working life as an English and history teacher at Franklin High School in Seattle. In 1979, she made a career change by entering the four-year inside wireman electrical apprenticeship program. In addition to working as a journeyman electrician, Nancy has also served as the Training Director at the Puget Sound Electrical Apprenticeship, as the Apprenticeship Program Manager for the Washington State Department of Labor and Industries, as a labor trustee at the Puget Sound Electrical Joint Apprenticeship Training Committee and as a business representative at IBEW, Local 46. Mason has also been a longtime tradeswoman activist throughout her career, advocating for the importance of apprenticeship for people of color and women to get into the trades and on the importance of apprenticeship as a highly skilled career path; ""the other four year degree""."																		
"Meehan, Matthew, 1896-1977"		Matthew Meehan scrapbook on maritime labor history	"Matthew Meehan (1896-1977) was born in Rhode Island, working in textile factories before going to work as a sailor at the age of 14. Meehan worked as a merchant seaman until 1928, when he came ashore in Portland, Oregon to become a longshore worker. Meehan was the head of the International Longshoremen's Association, Local 38–78 (Portland; later International Longshore and Warehouse Union, Local 8), before and after the 1934 Pacific Coast Maritime Strike. In 1936, Meehan became the editor of the ILA Pacific Coast's newspaper, The Pacific Coast Longshoreman. In 1937, Meehan was elected the first Secretary-Treasurer of the International Longshoremen's and Warehousemen's Union, the international union that formed when the Pacific Coast District of the ILA split from the rest of the ILA and joined the Congress of Industrial Organizations. In 1944, Meehan went to the Hawai'ian Islands to scout its prospects of potential organizing by the ILWU, laying the groundwork for what would become a transformational union drive and ILWU Local 142. In 1957, Meehan was appointed an arbitrator between the ILWU and its employer association, the Pacific Maritime Association. Meehan died at the age of 80 near Mount Hood, Oregon."																		
"Mendelsohn, Peter Patrick"		Peter Patrick Mendelsohn papers	Mr. Mendelsohn was a member of the Marine Cooks and Stewards Union.																		
"Miller, Charles A."		Charles Al Miller papers																			
"Miller, Elmer, 1898-1978"		Elmer Miller papers	"Elmer Miller, born in 1898, was a teacher, political activist, and trade unionist. Miller grew up in Adams County, Washington, attended Washington State College, and started teaching high school history in Pasco, Washington in 1926. He taught at Queen Anne High School in Seattle from 1930 until his retirement in 1963. He was active in local politics and in teachers' organizations. Miller was active in affiliates of the American Federation of Teachers, including the Washington State Federation of Teachers (WSFT), the Seattle Federation of Teachers (Local 200 of the AFT), and related organizations. He served as President of the WSFT in 1947-1948 and of the Seattle Federation of Teachers, 1952-1957. Miller died in 1978 in Seattle."																		
"Miller, J. L. (John Leonard)"		John Leonard Miller papers and oral history interview	"John (Jack) Leonard Miller was born on November 3, 1889 in Dayton, Kentucky. At 12 he left home and traveled around the country hoboing and taking odd jobs. He worked as a coal miner in Danville, Virginia and a harvester in the Midwest. Because of his interest in worker's rights, Miller joined the United Mine Workers while in Virginia. He joined the Socialist Party while he was in Canada and the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) in 1916. He moved to Seattle in early 1916 and was on board the Verona during the Everett Massacre of November 1916. He married Violet Wilson in 1924. After settling down Miller had a number of jobs and began writing. He continued to rally for workers rights and upon his retirement took up lobbying for fair treatment of senior citizens. In addition, he gave lectures and interviews regarding the Everett Massacre, and wrote short stories. He died at age 96 in 1986 of a heart ailment. He was the last living survivor of the Everett Massacre."																		
"Mink, Art"		Art Mink papers	"An activist, labor leader, and former member of the Communist Party USA, Art Mink was born and raised in rural Fairfield, Idaho. As a young man, he joined the ROTC and planned a career in military service. He was radicalized in the late 1930s by the apparent collapse of capitalism and by the Spanish Civil War, and joined the Communist Party in 1940 while a student at Boise Junior College. Mink moved with his wife to Seattle in 1942 where he served as a member of the executive board of the Northwest District Young Communist League and as a Party organizer in the Boilermaker's Union before being drafted into the Air Force. He was stationed in the Philippines during World War II as a 1st Sergeant in a military hospital. From 1946-1948 Mink attended law school at the University of Washington and was campus organizer for the Communist Party. During this time he was also a member of the Bookbinders Union. He moved briefly to Los Angeles to work as an editor in a small publishing firm and to conduct Party work in southern California.

Back in the Pacific Northwest, Mink began a new career on the waterfront, first as a warehouseman at a Seattle fish plant and ultimately as a longshoreman and a member of ILWU Local 19. He was active in union politics throughout his career. He worked on the Local 19 Stevedore Safety Committee for 5 years and served multiple terms as chairman of the Labor Relations Committee. In the mid 1950s Mink broke with the Communist Party and helped organize the rival Freedom Socialist Party. In 1971 he was elected Vice President of Local 19 and played an instrumental role in the union's historic strike that same year. Mink remained active after retiring from the longshore and was a great friend of the Harry Bridges Center for Labor Studies. He died in 2011."																		
"Moisio, Wayne"		"Wayne ""Waino"" Moisio papers"	"Wayne Moisio, nicknamed Waino, was an amateur boxer and longtime International Longshore and Warehouse Union, Local 19 member. He participated in the 1934 Pacific Coast Maritime Strike at the ""Battle at Smith Cove"" that almost completely shut down merchant access in the area. He was known for blocking train access on the Seattle Waterfront during the event and was nicknamed the ""Train Stopper"" as a result. The strike was in response to the port leadership's failure to comply with the National Industrial Recovery Act and the protection of collective bargaining rights for unions. Moisio was also a member of the International Longshore and Warehouse Union Pacific Coast Pensioner's association and attended many conventions and gatherings hosted by the association."																		
Moving Images Video Project (Organization)		Moving Images Video Project collection	"Mark Dworkin and Melissa Young began Moving Images in 1986 to tell the stories of ordinary people. Moving Images Video Project produces and distributes documentaries about war and peace, human rights, global justice, and protection for the environment. Founded by Young and Dworkin to increase understanding in the United States of political and social issues in Central America, Moving Images later expanded to address the AIDS epidemic, labor rights and childcare, international relations in the post cold-war era, implications of new genetic technologies, local food and farming, re-thinking our cities, and elements of a new economy that is more sustainable and just. Many of these programs have aired across North America on PBS, and they are widely distributed to schools, libraries, and community organizations. Text of organizational history derived from Moving Images website (http://movingimages.org)."																		
Musicians' Association of Seattle		"Musicians’ Association of Seattle, American Federation of Musicians Local 76-493 records"	"The Musicians’ Association of Seattle, American Federation of Musicians Local 76-493 is a labor union that represents musicians in Seattle; Vashon Island; Clallam, Grays Harbor, Jefferson, King, Kitsap, Kittitas, Mason, Island, Pierce, San Juan, Skagit, Thurston, and Whatcom counties; and parts of Pacific County. Local 76-493 has been a labor organization since 1890 and is led by elected officers and an elected board of directors.

Musicians’ unions began in Seattle in 1890 with the creation of the Seattle chapter of the Musicians Mutual Protective Union (MMPU) Local 76. MMPU Local 76 reorganized under the American Federation of Musicians (AFM) Local 76 in 1898 and represented white musicians. Non-white musicians were barred from joining AFM Local 76 so they formed a separate union, AFM Local 458. Tension between the two unions resulted in the international union revoking Local 458’s charter in April of 1924. However, Black and other musicians of color were able to charter a replacement union, Local 493, later that year. In 1958, Local 76 and Local 493 were amalgamated into Local 76, ending the racial segregation of musicians’ unions in Seattle. In 1994 the local’s name was changed to Local 76-493.

Previously distinct AFM locals in Western Washington became amalgamated under the jurisdiction of Local 76-493 between 1980 and 2010 including AFM Local 117, Tacoma; AFM Local 184, Everett; AFM Local 124, Olympia; AFM Local 236, Aberdeen; AFM Local 451, Bellingham; and AFM Local 461, Mount Baker/Anacortes.

Sources:

Blecha, Peter. ""AFM Local 493, Seattle's 'Negro Musicians' Union,' Holds Big Benefit Bash on May 29, 1951,"" February 20, 2013. http://www.historylink.org/File/10330.

Musicians’ Association of Seattle, American Federation of Musicians Local 76-493. ""About Us."" Musicians' Association of Seattle, February 28, 2017. https://local76-493.org/about-us/."																		
National Marine Engineers' Beneficial Association (U.S.)		National Marine Engineers' Beneficial Association records	"A National Maritime Labor organization. Throughout the 1920s, MEBA experienced a sharp decline in its membership. From about 22,000 in 1920 to 5,000 in 1934. In spite of this, during the period between World War I and World War II it was successful in raising wages, lowering working hours, and establishing the union hiring hall."																		
"Nelson, Lonnie, 1932-2014"		Lonnie Nelson papers	"Lonnie Nelson was born in Seattle Aug. 20, 1932, and named Madelon Sue by her parents Alma Viola Nickerson Nelson and Burt Gale Nelson. Her father was a founding member of the International Longshore and Warehouse Union and a leader of the Communist Party of Washington State.

In high school in 1948 she organized Young Progressives and was active in the Progressive Party campaign of Henry Wallace. She joined the Communist Party in 1951 at a time when CP members, including her father, were being blacklisted and harassed by the FBI.

She gathered signatures on the Stockholm Peace Appeal in the 1950s when Cold War elements were itching for war against the Soviet Union or China. That commitment to world peace continued in the years of solidarity with Cuba and Vietnam when she helped mobilize peace protests.

She was especially proud of a trip she took to Spain where veterans of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade, including her uncle, were honored as fighters against Franco fascism.

Nelson served as chairperson of a petition campaign against the McCarthy-era loyalty oath, which in 1972 presented 10,000 signatures to the state attorney general in Olympia. Later, she served on a committee defending the Black Panther Party.

An admirer of the Native American Indian people, she joined in the campaign to win restoration of the tribes' fishing rights. She befriended many of the Native American Indians in that struggle, working closely with Maiselle Bridges, a leader of the Nisqually tribe. Victory was won when Judge George Boldt handed down his landmark ruling 40 years ago that the tribes were entitled to half the salmon catch.

Her love of the Indian peoples and their struggles led her to join the ""Trail of Broken Treaties"" to Washington, D.C., in 1972, when the American Indian Movement occupied the Bureau of Indian Affairs headquarters. She helped raise funds for the legal defense of the occupiers. She knew Hank Adams and other Native American Indian leaders personally and interviewed them for articles in the Daily World during that sit-in.

Lonnie Nelson's first love was always the labor movement. During her working years, she was employed at a day care center at Providence Hospital for nearly six years. She worked to organize the workers into SEIU Local 6. She helped establish the Seattle branch of the Coalition of Labor Union Women (CLUW), heading up the CLUW Public Works Jobs Committee.

She was arrested three times for civil disobedience: during the Indian fishing rights struggle, against South African apartheid, and in the mid-1990s against Republican Newt Gingrich's ""Contract on America"" Medicare cuts.

(Source: People's World obituary for Lonnie Nelson by Tim Wheeler 02/14/14 http://www.peoplesworld.org/labor-stalwart-lonnie-nelson-dies-at-8/)"																		
"Neylan, Mickey"		Mickey Neylan papers	"Employee of the International Typographical Union Local #202, Seattle. Her brother was Harry E.B. Ault."																		
Harvey O'Connor	Q5892608	Harvey O'Connor papers	Political activist.																		
"Office and Professional Employees International Union. Local 23 (Tacoma, Wash.)"		"Office and Professional Employees International Union, Local 23 records"	Office and Professional Employees Local 23 represented workers in the Tacoma area until the organization merged into OPEIU Local 8 of Seattle in 2015.																		
"O'Reilly, Claude"		Claude O'Reilly Scrapbook of American Federation of Labor Annual Convention in Seattle	"Claude O'Reilly was the chairman of the American Federation of Labor annual convention in Seattle, Washington, on October 6-18, 1941."																		
"Office and Professional Employees International Union. Local 8 (Seattle, Wash.)"		"Office and Professional Employees International Union, Local 8 records"	Local 8 represents clerical and office workers of a wide variety of businesses around Puget Sound. Name of parent body changed from Office Employes International Union to Office and Professional Employees International Union in 1966.																		
"Olson, David J., 1941-2012"		David Olson papers	"University of Washington professor of political science, founding chair of the Harry Bridges Center for Labor Studies, scholar on urban and labor politics.

David Olson (Ph.D., University of Wisconsin) was Professor Emeritus of Political Science and the Harry Bridges Endowed Chair Emeritus in Labor Studies. He researched state, urban and labor politics in the United States. He was the co-author or co-editor of Black Politics: The Inevitability of Conflict (Holt, Rinehart and Winston) Theft of the City: Readings in Corruption in Urban America (Indiana), Commission Politics: The Processing of Racial Crisis in America (Trans-Action Books), Governing the United States (McGraw Hill), and To Keep The Republic (McGraw Hill). He also published numerous articles on urban politics, state politics, political violence, seaport politics, congestion pricing, living wage campaigns, term limits, and labor politics. In 2005 he received the S. Sterling Munro Public Service Teaching Award and in 2007 was named the inaugural Distinguished Civic Educator Award by the Washington State Senate. In 2006 Olson was knighted by the King of Norway as knight of the first class, order of merit for contributions to US/Norway scholarly exchange relations.

Outside the University, Olson advised or served as a consultant to various state, county, and municipal governments as well as community groups and the Ford Foundation on subjects ranging from evacuation under radiological emergency, to seaport organization, to publicly owned railroads, to political primary systems, to transportation organization, to trade union contract disputes.

David Olson died on Sept. 15, 2012."																		
Seattle Opportunities Industrialization Center		Opportunities Industrialization Center records	"OIC Seattle (often refered to locally as ""SOIC"") was incorporated in May 1966 as a private, nonprofit community-based vocational training center. It was founded as an outgrowth of the OIC movement which had been started two years earlier in Philadelphia. In 1972, OIC Seattle became the first community-based organization to receive federal designation as a Skills Center. Its rapid growth and expanding programs made possible the building of a multi-million dollar training center dedicated in 1974. OIC Seattle's diversified funding and its accreditation saved the school from the financial collapse experienced at the beginning of the 1980s by many similar institutions, but it could not survive the federal government's rapid and drastic cutback of funding around 1983 and 1984. It attempted to continue its services by totally reorganizing its service delivery system. Efforts continued another two years but on September 25, 1986, a Chapter 11 bankruptcy notice was filed."																		
Pacific Coast Pensioners Association		Pacific Coast Pensioners Association photographs	"The Pacific Coast Pensioners Association was formed in 1968 to provide unity and direction to ILWU retirees, and to represent the pensioners and their local unions in contract negotiations and with Social Security."																		
Pacific Northwest Labor History Association		Pacific Northwest Labor History Association records	"The Pacific Northwest Labor History Association (PNLHA) is a non-profit association dedicated to preserving the history and heritage of workers in the Pacific Northwest. It considers the “Pacific Northwest” to be British Columbia, Oregon and Washington.

Members of the PNLHA include trade unionists, students, academics, and others who share an interest in the history and heritage of workers in the pacific northwest region. The PNLHA believes the labor movement must know where it’s been to know where it’s going. It depends exclusively on memberships to sustain its activities.

Adapted from the ""About"" section of the PNLHA website (https://pnlha.wordpress.com/about-2/ ) on 3/16/2016"																		
"Palmer, Douglas Shaw"		Douglas Shaw Palmer manuscript on Sidney Gerber	Douglas Shaw Palmer was a Seattle attorney who wrote an unpublished manuscript about Sidney Gerber.																		
"Parks, Norman B."		Norman Parks papers	"Norman Parks is a retired secretary-treasurer of Portland ILWU Local 8 and a longtime negotiator of west coast longshore contracts, he obtained the coins in his role as local 8 officer in 1979."																		
"Parry, Will (Labor activist)"		Will Parry papers	"Will Parry was a labor activist in King County, Washington. From 1977 to 1978, Parry and Ross Rieder, of the Washington State Labor Council, organized King County unions to assist workers in picketing automobile dealerships. The strikes were in reaction to a growing trend among the dealerships to open their shops to non-union work. Parry and Ross paired again to organize the Washington State delegation of union members and supporters for Solidarity Day -- a rally against the Reagan administration initiated by the AFL-CIO Executive Council and held in Washington, D.C., on September 19, 1981."																		
Pierce County Central Labor Council (Wash.)		Pierce County Central Labor Council records	"The Tacoma Trades Council was organized in 1890 as an independent organization. It was dormant March, 1895 until November, 1899 when it affiliated with the American Federation of Labor. After it was dissolved in September, 1907, a new body, the Tacoma Central Labor Council, was chartered by the AFL in November, 1907. The records of the Tacoma Trades Council were turned over to the Central Labor council at this time. As a result of the AFL-CIO merger the Tacoma Central Labor Council (AFL) and the Pierce County Industrial Union Council (CIO) merged to form the Pierce County Central Labor Council in December, 1957. In 1909 the Central Labor Council established its newspaper, the ""Tacoma Labor Advocate,"" which was published until 1978."																		
"Pitharoulis, Cae"		"Cae Pitharoulis Manuscript and Computer Discs of ""A Personal Report"""																			
Puget Sound Advocates for Retirement Action		Puget Sound Advocates for Retirement Action records	"The Puget Sound Alliance for Retired Americans (PSARA) is a Seattle-based branch of the Alliance for Retired Americans. Founded in 1981, PSARA affiliated with the national Alliance of Retired Americans in 2001.

In 2002, the organization changed its name to the Puget Sound Council of Senior Citizens. The organization changed its name again in June of 2012 to the Puget Sound Advocates for Retirement Action and disaffiliated with the national Alliance of Retired Americans. The organization still works in close coordination with the Washington State Alliance of Retired Americans."																		
RIDGE (Organization)		RIDGE records	"RIDGE was a community organization in Roslyn, Washington formed in 1988. Ellie Belew and Douglas Kilgore were leaders of the organization, which engaged in activism around forestry and land use issues during the late 1980s and into the early 2010s. RIDGE partnered with labor groups-- especially the building trades unions-- in a long fight to block the development of what is now the Suncadia Resort, the first Master Planned Resort in Washington State. Master Planned Resort [MPR] is a type of zoning distinction defined by the Washington State Growth Management [GMA] Act. MPRs are self-contained and fully integrated planned unit developments, in a setting of significant natural amenities, with primary focus on destination resort facilities consisting of short-term visitor accommodations associated with a range of developed on-site indoor or outdoor recreational facilities. The plan allows urban development outside of urban areas and connection to municipal wastewater connections but requires the MPR to be separated from surrounding communities.

RIDGE used a variety of tactics to attempt to block Suncadia’s development including: litigation, land use mapping, water rights, community meetings, and zoning changes. Later, RIDGE engaged with Futurewise to litigate and organize for reforms to the Kittitas County Comprehensive Plan. RIDGE dissolved in 2014.

RIDGE members warned of the negative environmental and economic effects typical of the boom and bust cycles of logging on local economies. The boom and bust cycle of a town dominated by a major extractive industry was a familiar cycle in Roslyn, founded in 1886 as a mining company town initiated and platted by the Northern Pacific Coal Company, a subsidiary of the Northern Pacific Railway. The last mine closed in Roslyn in 1963, and the bust contributed to an economic downturn and population decline. After the loss of mining jobs, the town’s demographics were largely composed of retired mining families and older white people who moved to Roslyn to complete tree-planting contracts.

RIDGE’s connection to labor organizing is unique among other environmental groups of the time. RIDGE challenged the notion that extractive economy workers and environmentalists have competing interests, and instead sought to harmonize the need for a sustainable forest economy among workers and those concerned with the environment. RIDGE joined a coalition with the building trades unions after Suncadia expressed interest in bringing in open shop contractors to build the resort and that they had no intention of utilizing a responsible contract. Once it was evident Suncadia was going to be built despite efforts to block the development, the coalition fought for and obtained a pledge for employing union workers in its construction. The organization’s leaders also have strong ties with the labor movement. Doug Kilgore is connected to the labor movement in Washington State, and Ellie Belew has researched and authored several books in collaboration with labor unions and labor activists.



Source: 

Source: 

Source: "																		
Radical Women	Q7280468	Radical Women National Office (Seattle) records	"Radical Women (RW) is a socialist feminist organization. RW sought to become the socialist wing of the feminist movement. The organization was founded in Seattle in 1967 when Freedom Socialist Party co-founder Clara Fraser and her close colleague, Gloria Martin, joined with young women from Students for a Democratic Society to build women's leadership in the left and anti-war movements. In 1973, RW formally affiliated with the Freedom Socialist Party, and the party gained a sister organization. Other founding members include Melba Windoffer and Susan Stern.

RW is active in intersectional feminist socialist organizing against racism, sexism, homophobia, fascism, and labor exploitation. Their political analysis sees women's political action as essential in creating social change and trains women to lead these campaigns. They have been especially active in pressuring other feminist organizations into better representing women of color and the LBGTQ+ community."																		
Radical Women. Seattle Office		Radical Women Seattle Office records	"Radical Women (RW) is an all women organization dedicated to ""exposing, resisting and eliminating the inequities of women's existence by providing women the leadership skills, social history, and working-class consciousness that they were denied in the male-dominated antiwar, antipoverty and civil-rights movements."" RW was founded in Seattle in 1967 when the Freedom Socialist Party co-founder Clara Fraser and her close colleague, Gloria Martin, joined with young women from Students for a Democratic Society to build women’s leadership in the left and anti-war movements. RW also sought to become the socialist wing of the feminist movement. In 1973, it formally affiliated with the Freedom Socialist Party, and the party gained a sister organization. Other founding members include Melba Windoffer and Susan Stern.

RW was active in anti-Vietnam War protests, labor issues, gay rights, women’s rights in the workplace, divorce reform, and other issues that affect oppressed peoples. They are an organization that does intersectional organizing against racism, sexism, homophobia, and labor exploitation. RW's political analysis sees women's leadership and political action as decisive to social change and trains women to lead in these campaigns."																		
"Ranta, Toivo"		Toivo Ranta photographs and papers	"Toivo Ranta worked as a commercial fisherman from the 1930s through the 1950s. Ranta and his brother emigrated from Finland to join their father in Alaska working summers for the Alaska Packers’ Association and Libby, McNeill and Libby. Both companies manufactured and packaged canned salmon. Ranta worked as a fisherman during the early days of commercial salmon fishing in the Pacific Ocean, off the coast of Washington, Canada, and Alaska. He also worked during the transition from the industry being fleets of smaller sailing ships to larger ships with internal combustion engines. Ranta left the fishing industry during this transition and his family started a plywood mill in Port Angeles, Washington to replace fishing as their main economic activity."																		
"Retail Clerks International Protective Association. Local 186 (Enumclaw, Wash.)"		Retail Clerks International Protective Association minutes																			
"Rice, Rick, 1940-"		Rick Rice papers	"Richard ""Rick"" Rice was born in 1940 and grew up in Huntington Beach, California. Rice attended the University of California at Berkeley before moving to New York City and then to Seattle in the early 1970s. Rice was active in the student, anti-war, and civil rights movements of the 1960s and 1970s.

Rice worked as a bus driver for Metro Transit for four years, where he was an active union member and a member of a rank-and-file caucus committe. Rice participated in a Metro Transit strike in 1974. During the 70s and 80s, Rice was an activist in several local organizations such as Committee for Solidarity with the People of El Salvador (CISPES), the Venceremos Brigade, and the Anti-Apartheid movement. Rice participated in weekly protests in front of the South African consulate in Seattle during this period.

His wife, Roselynn Harrell (also known as Rose Woodward) was also a Seattle metro driver and a social and labor activist. Harrell was involved in South Seattle Community College's Women's Employment Network and was a welder. Rice and Harrell worked for two years at a Uniroyal and Firestone tire plant in Long Beach California in an effort to organize it politically as an outgrowth of their activism as members of the socialist organization Line of March. Line of March was a Marxist-Leninist organization that inspired many New Left student activists to become ""proletarianized"" workers who would find work in industry and radicalize other workers.

During the 1990s, Rice was active in the Seattle area efforts to create a Labor Party and attended conferences on behalf of the effort. Rice's second wife, Kate Thompson is an artist and an activist. Thompson was a co-founder and co-owner of Storefront Press in Seattle. As of 2014, Rice lives in Mexico."																		
"Rieder, Ross K."		Ross Rieder Audio and Video Collection	"Ross Rieder is a union activist, labor historian, and preservationist. Rieder served as president of the Pacific Northwest Labor History Association for 37 years from 1978 to 2015, and remains a member and active supporter of the PNLHA. Before retiring, Rieder was a music teacher and a member of the Everett American Federation of Teachers local union. Rieder also worked for the the Snohomish County Central Labor Council and Washington State Federation of Labor. Other achievements by Rieder during his career in labor include his co-leadership (with Will Parry) of a Washington State Labor Council campaign in 1978-1979 to assist King County unions to organize workers in picketing automobile dealerships in reaction to a growing trend among the dealerships to open their shops to non-union work.

Parry and Ross paired again to organize the Washington State delegation of union members and supporters for Solidarity Day -- a rally against the Reagan administration initiated by the AFL-CIO Executive Council and held in Washington, D.C., on September 19, 1981. Later, Rieder co-hosted a labor radio show on KSER (Everett) called ""Part of the Union"" between and served as president of the AFT retiree chapter in Washington."																		
"Rivera, Guillermo"		"Guillermo ""Memo"" Rivera collection of SEIU 775 and Working Washington records"	"Guillermo ""Memo"" Rivera is Deputy Organizing Director for Service Employees International Union, Local 775. He collected this binder of materials that relate to SEIU 775's involement with the effort to raise the minimum wage in SeaTac to $15 an hour, get labor-friendly council members elected and voters registered, and organize port and airport workers. Rivera became an organizer for Local 775 in 2005, and his involvement with organizing at the airport and SeaTac on workers' issue began in 2001 with SEIU's ""Fight for a Fair Economy Campaign."" This went from a broad-based door-knocking campaign to hear abour workers' issues to meetings with airport workers in 2012. Rivera served as the field director on that campaign, and was also involved in the SeaTac Mimimum Wage Proposition 1 campaign in 2013."																		
"Robin, Joshua"		Joshua Robin papers	Newspaper reporter for the Seattle Times and a member of the Pacific Northwest Newspaper Guild.																		
"Rojo, Trinidad"		Trinidad Rojo papers	"Filipino author, sociologist, labor union official. Rojo was a president of ILWU No. 7. He was a student at the University of Washington and at Stanford, where he was a research fellow."																		
"Rosenblum, Jonathan, 1961-"		Jonathan Rosenblum papers	Jonathan Rosenblum is a political planner and labor organizer for local and regional campaigns.																		
"Schwantes, Carlos A., 1945-"		Carlos A. Schwantes papers																			
Tyree Scott	Q7861471	Tyree Scott papers	"Tyree Scott (1940-2003) was a labor leader and activist deeply involved in many minority workers’ and equal opportunity organizations.

Scott, an electrician, grew up in Texas, moved to Seattle in 1966 and became a leader in the Central Contractors Association. This organization of minority workers led many peaceful demonstrations against discriminatory hiring practices in Seattle’s construction industry in the summer and fall of 1969. Through the protests, the issue of discriminatory employment was noted by the American Friends Service Committee. After investigating the situation, the American Friends Service Committee approached Scott and the leadership of the Central Contractors Association and proposed a new community-based organization that would organize minority workers to fight discrimination in the unions and in the construction trades. The United Construction Workers Association was founded in 1970 with financial support from the American Friends Service Committee. Tyree Scott was a founding member and worked intensively within the Association, first as a paid staff member and then later as a director.

United Construction Workers Association combined community organization, peaceful demonstrations, and legal action to fight workplace discrimination. The Association saw an early victory in the class action suit United States vs. Ironworkers Local 86 et. al. – in which the United States Department of Justice sued five local unions and apprenticeship and training committees under Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. In 1970 Judge William J. Lindberg found that there had indeed been racial discrimination in the practices of all institutions named in this case. He ordered wide-ranging relief programs, including quotas for union membership, hiring, and apprenticeship classes and changes in hiring and dispatching procedures.

Judge Lindberg’s ruling also created the Court Order Advisory Committee – a private institution that would ensure the implementation of these relief measures. The Court Order Advisory Committee collected data and published reports on industry employment practices. The United Construction Workers Association had two members on Court Order Advisory Committee board of directors; Tyree Scott served as one of these representatives from 1972 to 1978. The Court Order Advisory Committee was reformed as the Vocational Exploration and Referral Service Center in December of 1978.

In 1972 United Construction Workers Association was also made party to the United States vs. Local 86 suit, which allowed them to participate officially in the enforcement of the court decrees. United Construction Workers Association collected reports of employment progress in local trades and continued to pursue legal action against companies defaulting on the requirements of the court settlement.

By court decree, United Construction Workers Association also became the point of entry for apprenticeship programs. United Construction Workers Association assisted workers with job application processes, offered extra training for apprenticeship classes, and served as a liaison between workers, unions and employers. The United Construction Workers Association also worked with civil and community institutions, including the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, the Washington State Manpower and Planning Council, various Seattle city agencies, the Seattle Urban League and others.

After the landmark Lindberg decision, United Construction Workers Association also began to widen its focus beyond minority work in the local building trades to other areas of employment in Seattle and other cities across the nation. In 1973 a branch of United Construction Workers Association was established in Oakland, California.

United Construction Workers Association also initiated the Southwestern Workers Federation, based in Little Rock, Arkansas, in 1973. Two United Construction Workers Association staff members - Tyree Scott and Todd Hawkins - visited eight cities in Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma and Texas under contract from the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to help minority worker activists organize further and to help them draw together legal resources to file Title VII complaints.

In 1973 Michael Woo of the United Construction Workers Association worked among Asian and Alaska Native cannery workers who lived in Seattle but worked summers in the salmon processing plants in Alaska. From this work the Alaska Cannery Workers Association was formed to combat discrimination in worker housing, facilities, pay scales and hire status. The Alaska Cannery Workers Association filed Title VII lawsuits against the world’s largest fish companies, including the New England Fish Company and Wards Cove Packing Company.

In 1973 members of United Construction Workers Association, Alaska Cannery Workers Association, and the Northwest Chapter of United Farm Workers of America came together to found the Labor and Employment Law Office. Labor and Employment Law Office hired lawyers and served workers of color, helping them pursue legal recourse in issues of labor discrimination. Labor and Employment Law Office helped United Construction Workers Association, Alaska Cannery Workers Association, United Farm Workers of America, other worker’s organizations and individual workers win landmark civil rights cases, including Domingo vs. New England Fish Company, Carpenter vs. NEFCO-Fidalgo Packing Company and Yates vs. Local 7 Asbestos Workers, et al.

While Labor and Employment Law Office had always combined its legal work with participation in community organization, the focus was primarily on court action in the early years of its operation. However, in 1989 the Supreme Court’s decision in the long-contested Atonio vs. Ward’s Cove case constituted a major shift in the pursuit of discrimination cases and in Labor and Employment Law Office’s operations. Ever since the landmark civil rights suits of the early 1970s, the burden of proof in discrimination charges had rested on the employers. In the Wards Cove case, the Court’s decision was that the plaintiffs’ statistical demonstration of racial disparity between classes of workers did not make a prima facie case for violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act. This set a new precedent for the burden of proof in Civil Rights cases and vastly increased the difficulty of workers pursuing discrimination charges under Title VII.

As pursuing court action as an avenue for change became more difficult, Labor and Employment Law Office’s focus and activities opened to a broader spectrum. Labor and Employment Law Office shifted its emphasis to offering other types of assistance to low-income, minority and workers’ groups both locally and across the globe. Tyree Scott has served on the board of directors of Labor and Employment Law Office since its inception.

In the late 1970s Scott, Scott’s wife Beverly Sims and Michael Woo were members of the Seattle Workers Group, which in turn was associated with the Organizing Committee for an Ideological Center. The Center was an umbrella group that coordinated the activities of various Marxist workers organizations across the country. The purpose of the Center was both to support local Marxist groups in their effort to organize and educate workers locally, but also to bring together disparate groups across the nation into a more ideologically and structurally unified whole. The Center’s long-term goal was to build a national Labor/Workers Party. The organization disbanded about 1981.

Tyree Scott became less involved in the activities of the United Construction Workers Association in the late seventies, and the organization faded out of existence around 1981. Tyree Scott retired from the electrician’s trade and remained active as a board member for the Labor and Employment Law Office until his death in 2003."																		
Labor Archives of Washington	Q22096098	SeaTac Seattle Minimum Wage History Project records	"The SeaTac Seattle Minimum Wage History Project is a research, archival documentation, and oral history project co-directed by University of Washington political science professor Michael McCann and University of Washington labor archivist Conor Casey.

Beginning in 2015, the project members--McCann, Casey, and graduate and undergraduate students at the University of Washington--collected articles about the SeaTac and Seattle camaigns and then peformed dozens oral history interviews. As well, some hard copy archival collections were collected for the Labor Archives of Washington, websites were archivally captured, and some materials were digitized relating to the campaigns.

The resulting "																		
"Searles, Gordon"		Gordon Searles collection on Washington State Printers' lockout	"Gordon Searles was a printer and union member and president of the Olympia chapter of the International Typographical Union, Local 142."																		
Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project	Q7442083	Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project records	"The Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project, based at the University of Washington under the direction of Professor James Gregory, is a multi-media website dedicated to documenting the Pacific Northwest’s multiracial labor and civil rights history. It offers over 1000 primary documents and photographs, over 70 video oral histories, original research essays produced by undergraduate and graduate students, short films, slideshows, historical overviews and bibliographic guides. The project is a rich web-based resource designed to provide teachers, students, community members and researchers with information about Washington’s past."																		
Seattle Education Association		Seattle Education Association records	"The Seattle Teachers’ Association, or STA, was established in 1958 with the merger of the Seattle Association of Classroom Teachers and the Seattle Grade Teachers’ Club.

The STA was affiliated with the Washington Education Association (WEA) and the National Education Association (NEA), although this affiliation was stronger in the first decade of the STA than in the period covered by this collection.

The STA worked with the WEA to pass the Professional Negotiations Act, or State of Washington Chapter 143 Law of 1965 (amended in 1969). 

The STA united with the Seattle Federation of Teachers (SFT) on several strikes and protests. However, much of the time the STA and SFT competed, and the amicability of these relations fluctuated over the years. The SFT often took a more aggressive position when bargaining, perhaps putting pressure on the STA to increase its own activity.

Over the years covered by this collection, the STA was consistently concerned with issues of members’ salaries, rights, employment, district funding, school curriculum, and the de-facto racial segregation of schools. 

For a history of the organization between 1958 and 1970, see the finding aid for the 

The 1970s was a time of increased grassroots teacher involvement in the STA. The organization became more assertive and staged several strikes. 

With the 1980s, the STA faced new difficulties. House Bill 166 passed in 1981 and limited the ability for the STA to negotiate teacher salaries, as it mandated that Seattle educators could not attempt to negotiate a higher pay schedule than their counterparts in other regions of the state. 

"																		
"Seattle Teachers' Association (Seattle, Wash.)"		Seattle Teachers' Association records	"The Seattle Teachers’ Association or STA was formed with the 1958 merger of the Seattle Association of Classroom Teachers and the Seattle Grade Teachers’ Club. The plans for this unification had been in the works for nearly ten years, and it produced the largest schoolteacher organization in Washington State, with 2,500 members. The STA was formed to represent the collective bargaining rights of teachers in Seattle Public School District No. 1., with the objective of developing “public understanding of the objective of education, promote its goal, and encourage the professional growth of association members.” Over the years, the organization began to focus on the welfare of its members and became more strident in its advocacy efforts.

The STA was affiliated with the Washington Education Association (WEA) and the National Education Association (NEA).The STA also collaborated with the Local 609 and the Operating Engineers Union, two unions associated with building maintenance in Seattle Schools.

During much of the period covered by this collection, the STA had minimal bargaining and professional negotiating power. To gain leverage in this period, the STA used a variety of techniques: it pressured and courted individual local legislators, met with the school board and offered input, and commissioned and collected studies and reports to support the STA position. The STA also kept close ties to the WEA and NEA in this time period and used the resources and support of these larger, more established organizations. Much of the STA activities of this time period involved soliciting and sharing knowledge with the WEA, NEA, and other teacher organizations throughout the country. As a relatively new organization, the STA was mostly focused on accruing members and maintaining their participation. Therefore, much of the material in this collection deals with the day-to-day operations and organizing of the STA.

Yet at this time the STA did give attention to some specific issues. The STA was consistently concerned about issues of members’ salaries, rights, and employment, district funding, and school curriculum. Specific to the late 1950s and early 1960s, the STA particularly lobbied for teaching to be treated as a profession and, therefore, to be given the proper respect, resources, and salaries. The STA also supported local levies, appealings to voters and gain electoral support. This strategy was at its height in the early 1960s. At the same time, the STA argued that the levy system was only a band-aid and did not fundamentally address the salary issues. One other major issue of the time, particularly in the late 1960s, was the question of how to give a better education in Central Area schools, Washington Middle School, Meany Middle School, and Garfield High School. These schools suffered a variety of crises, particularly of student violence and protest, in the late 1960s. The STA was concerned with how to best aid the teachers in these schools, in giving them appropriate physical protection, emotional relief, and eventually alleviating the problems in the schools. Connected to this issue was that of school de-facto segregation, and the STA supported efforts to alleviate the racial segregation. Overall, the STA in this period was concerned largely with educator rights, but also with many related topics.

The STA began to take a more assertive tone during the later 1960s. For example, in 1967 president of the STA Pete Neuschwander declared that a proposed $15.7 million levy, the largest in Seattle history at the time, was “not enough.”

Much of this assertiveness, however, was probably in response to gaining negotiation power. The STA worked with the WEA to pass the Professional Negotiations Act, or State of Washington Chapter 143 Law of 1965 (amended in 1969). STA President Wes Ruff hailed it as a great step, stating, “‘The Seattle School Board, without a doubt, is one of the finest in the state…. But there is a difference between us making a half-hour ‘presentation’ and actually hammering things out in real negotiations…. The board, the decision-maker, owes itself the opportunity to have conversations with the practitioners in the field, the educators with knity-gritty information.’”

A large subgroup of this collection contains primarily WEA-produced materials. The WEA was formed “to promote the cause of education in the state of Washington.” It was affiliated with the NEA and the STA, but covered all teachers in the state. Many of these artifacts specifically deal with the WEA’s relationship with the STA, such as correspondence with STA leadership. For a history of the organization between 1970 and 1985, see the finding aid for the 

"																		
"Seattle Union Record (Seattle, Wash. : 1918)"		Seattle Union Record business records	"The Seattle Union Record was a labor newspaper published from 1899 to 1928. For most of its life it was published by the Central Labor Council of Seattle; Harry Ault was the paper's editor from 1912 to 1928. The paper was published weekly from 1899 until 1918, when it became a daily. The paper played an important role in the Seattle General Strike of 1919."																		
Seattle Worker Center		Seattle Worker Center records	"Tom Lewiston, of the Seattle Worker Center, appears to be the originator of most of these files. Most of the folder labels are written in a single hand, but it is not evident at this point whether that is Tom Lewiston's handwriting. News article reports that Lewiston was coordinator of the SWC as of May 1988 (http://seattlepi.nwsource.com/archives/1988/8801130898.asp). He is also associated on a piece of correspondence with the Sheet Metal Workers."																		
"Service Employees International Union. Local 120 (Everett, Wash)"		"Service Employees International Union, Local 120 records"	"The Building Service Employees International Union changed their name to the Service Employees International Union in 1968. BSEIU Local 108 merged into BSEIU Local 120 in 1960, which in turn merged with SEIU Local 925 around July of 2001. The successor organization, SEIU Local 925, is comprised of the public sector employees of the former locals. Minutes of the Bellingham Central Labor Council are part of the collection, apparently because it was within BSEIU Local 108's geographic and occupational jurisdiction of Bellingham Washington before they merged with Local 120."																		
"Ship Scalers, Dry Dock, and Boat Yard Workers Union, Local 541 (Seattle, Washington)"		"Ship Scalers Dry Dock and Boat Yard Workers Union, Local 541 Records"	"On the eve of the 1934 West Coast Strike, only 1.4 percent of the waterfront workers in California were African American. In Pacific Northwestern cities, like Seattle and Portland, the number was even less. Prior to WWII, many of Seattle’s waterfront unions contained few workers of color, including the Ship Scalers, Dry Dock, and Miscellaneous Boat Yard Workers Union, Local 541.

By the end of WWII, however, African Americans comprised more than half of the union’s workforce. This sea change in the composition of Seattle’s maritime workforce was a result of the migration of black workers from the East and South to the Northwest in search of wartime jobs. Indeed, between 1940 and 1945, Seattle’s black population jumped from 3,700 to more than 10,000. Forced to work in the toughest and dirtiest jobs, African American migrants came to form the backbone of the Ship Scalers Union (SSU), which did not discriminate against its black membership. Essentially, ship scalers were the maintenance crews of the docks, doing the lowest paying and dirtiest work available. Servicing ships below the waterline, these workers cleaned the inside and outside, scraping off barnacles, clearing oil drums and ship holds.

After the war, many waterfront unions across the coast opened their ranks to workers of color, though often begrudgingly. Most unions found the challenge of integration exceedingly difficult because of a historically reluctant white membership. In Seattle, reports of discrimination in shipyards were not uncommon. Al Langly, a black member of the International Longshoreman’s and Warehouseman’s Union, Local 13 in San Pedro, articulated a popular feeling among minority workers: “Most of the whites were scared of the blacks, because we never had any around here and we never associated with them…. When they started to come in, the whites didn’t want to work with them.” Langly goes on to describe active discrimination in Local 13, where there was “a kind of vigilante group of ultra-conservative” members of the union, who “had never been around blacks, or else they were southerners,” and resolved to maintain the union’s white character through active exclusion.

The example of Local 13 reflects a larger West Coast trend. Prior to WWII, most unions had few, if any, African American workers unless there was a segregated auxiliary set up, as was the case among many locals of the International Brotherhood of Boilermakers and other unions. As the United States became further involved in the war effort, black workers from the South came to the shipyards to fill the labor shortages created by white workers gone to war.

In most unions, the transition in labor force racial demographics was, according to historian Bruce Nelson, “not an easy one,” but for the Ship Scalers Union in Seattle the transition occurred naturally and without constraint, marking Local 541 as an anomaly among West Coast Unions. As early as 1941 the SSU published anti-discriminatory articles in its newsletter, and allied itself with the minority worker and even “foreign-born Americans” after the Japanese attack at Pearl Harbor.

In a 1982 Seattle Times feature of the union, Dick Clever recounted the Ship Scalers Union apparent seamless transition (and nebulous beginning): “Consensus has the Ship Scalers local established in the mid-1930s by Norwegian shipyard workers from Ballard. The Norwegians drifted into the craft unions representing more skilled workers, and the Ship Scalers came to represent, as it does today, those performing some of the dirtiest, most dangerous tasks in Puget Sound’s shipyards.” African Americans in the Northwest’s shipyards were by and large barred from the craft trades, and, Clever continues, “found themselves with the lowest-paying, dirtiest jobs—and of necessity, with the Ship Scalers Union.” This “necessity,” as Clever called it, pushed the union in a new activist direction. From the mid-1930s to 1986, Local 541 of the Seattle Ship Scalers Union articulated a broad political agenda to address specific maritime employment conditions, as well as the struggle for civil rights and social change.

For much of the twentieth century, Seattle’s racial discrimination in employment, schools, and housing echoed the national norm, though perhaps in more hidden ways from those in the South or Northeast. It was in this realm that the SSU found its cause to fight against tacit discrimination in the city. Indeed, Clever notes that “there has been hardly a time when Local 541 was not embroiled in controversy, whether external or internal.” From WWII on, the Ship Scalers Union played an active and integrated role in Seattle’s social history, especially Seattle’s black community’s fight for equality. By allying itself with Seattle civil rights organizations, using its union hall as a meeting place for political activism, and allowing both communists and African Americans to be freely admitted to its ranks, Ship Scalers, Local 541 emerged as a progressive voice and effected some of the most significant civil rights reform in the city, both within and outside the shipyards. Although the union’s social activism waned in the 1960s and eventually dissolved in 1986, it remained an important fixture of the Seattle waterfront and the black community until the transfer of their jurisdiction.

For the Ship Scalers Union, along with other maritime industries, the 1934 strike marked the beginning of black workers’ entry into the shipyards as permanent members of the waterfront community. Insofar as African American laborers found work prior to the strike, it was mainly as strike breakers, and even then only temporarily. What changed during the 1934 strike was that West Coast unions realized in order to be an effective seat of power among workers, there could be no ample body of non-unionized laborers. Under the leadership of Harry Bridges, the International Longshoreman’s and Warehouseman’s Union was among the first to take steps towards integration. In California, Bridges implored black workers to join the strike and man the picket lines, speaking in black neighborhoods of the San Francisco Bay area and in black churches. Reflecting on the strike and his efforts towards integration, Bridges claimed that “I went directly to them. I said: ‘Our union means a new deal for Negroes. Stick with us and we’ll stand for your inclusion in [the] industry.’… [A]lmost without exception, they stuck with us. They helped us. The employers were frustrated in their attempt to use them for scabs.”Although Bridges fell short on the promise for some locals of the ILWU, by and large, black workers were able to gain employment in the West Coast shipyards.

What the 1934 strike began in terms of racial integration on the waterfront and in the Ship Scalers Union, WWII catalyzed. In Seattle, the black population grew by 413 percent between the years 1940 and 1950, and more than 45,000 African Americans migrated to the Puget Sound region to seek work in the defense industries. Among both black and white migrant workers, largely from the rural South, the consensus was that Seattle represented a sort of promised land for employment opportunities, and for blacks specifically, equal employment opportunities. Historian Larry Richardson writes, “African-Americans who migrated improved their lot,” and that Seattle was “the end of the line both socially and geographically. There was no better place to go.” This was relatively true when compared to other west coast cities, but even in Seattle, there was mounting racial tension. At the beginning of the war nearly every wartime industry except the waterfront still barred blacks from work, including Boeing, Pacific Car and Foundry, and Doran Brass, among others. It is not surprising then that most black workers came to work in Seattle’s twenty-nine shipyards and that by the war’s end, 4,078, or seven percent, of the 60,328 shipyard workers were African American. In his history of the black community in Seattle, Quintard Taylor explains the reason for Seattle’s shipyard liberalism:

Unlike other West Coast cities, no major company dominated Seattle’s shipbuilding industry. In addition to the Todd and Seattle-Tacoma shipbuilding companies, the largest in the region, the twenty-seven other shipyards in the Seattle area collectively employed about 60 percent of the shipyard workers. Furthermore, the powerful International Brotherhood of Boilermakers, which dominated shipyards in Portland, the San Francisco Bay area, and Los Angeles, had exclusive bargaining agreements only with Todd and Seattle-Tacoma Shipbuilding….Consequently, Seattle’s African American shipyard workers were not segregated into auxiliary locals of the Boilermakers union, nor were they denied promotion opportunities….While there were sporadic complaints of discrimination in Seattle’s shipyards, the systematic segregation of blacks that persisted throughout the war years in other West Coast ship construction facilities did not evolve in Seattle.

However, any joy surrounding this integration should be tempered. While the SSU itself did not discriminate, many companies, boat yards, and individuals did, and the excess of workers allowed easy routes for segregation in the workforce. There was plentiful work on the waterfront and for ship scalers, but this employment availability was not a singular victory. Many hiring halls along the coast served as de facto sites of discrimination. Workers could readily be replaced if the working conditions were not favorable (i.e. if they were forced to work with workers of other races). In an oral history interview with Bruce Nelson, black longshoreman Walter Williams of the San Pedro Local 13 recalled that “some of the regular ‘longies’…would say, ‘I’m going to call me a damn replacement,’ if they saw a black guy coming down into the hold. And they would call a replacement rather than work with us.” Seattle shipyards and members of SSU were not the exception to this trend. One pre-war edition of the

When general integration in Seattle did arrive during WWII, it was not spurred by moral justice, but by the sheer excess of work and a lack of laborers to do it. Del Castle, secretary-treasurer of the Ship Scalers Union during the WWII years, recalled with a certain facetiousness in 1982 that the Ship Scalers “got into the complicated problem of unions discriminating, but labor was so short that the King County Labor Council agreed that it was their patriotic duty to accept black workers into their ranks.” Most migrants arrived in Seattle to find the racial conditions better than where they left, but not as ideal as they had hoped. Most came to believe that Seattle’s existing residents of color “had not been aggressive in asserting their civil rights, and thus, claims of ‘good race relations with whites’ were vastly exaggerated.” The tension between old residents’ racist attitudes and practices and recent migrants grew. The migrants soon sought to improve their situation by their own hand, and as Castle articulated, he and the SSU dynamically participated in that struggle.

For the Ship Scalers Union, the United States’ entry into WWII marked a turning point in activism. Prior to the war, the union did not contain restrictions on membership in terms of race and openly admitted workers of color. Once the war started, the white-majority SSU turned its efforts to aggressively publishing outspoken messages in support of equal rights and chastising discrimination as fascist and “playing into the hands of Hitler.” The December 1941 issue of Scaler’s News came out strongly against discrimination in the shipyards and waterfront unions: “The Trade Unions, together with all other organizations of the people, regardless of race or color, must concentrate their combined forces against the enemies of the Nation!” This rhetoric and call for victory abroad and unification at home can be seen as part of the national “Double V” campaign during the war. Many African Americans felt that a simultaneous war was being fought against Jim Crow laws in America. In 1942, James G. Thompson wrote to the Pittsburgh Courier questioning how Americans can fight in a war against tyranny overseas when “ugly prejudices here are seeking to destroy our democratic form of government just as surely as the Axis forces.” For many African Americans, the fight against fascism abroad was a fight against Jim Crow. The Double V campaign led the SSU to engage in a national dialogue as opposed to concentrating on local civil rights issues. It is clear that the SSU’s devotion to civil rights went beyond the pragmatic integration of many unions and shipyards and indeed, formed the basis of an involvement in civil rights struggles in future years.

In December 1941, the SSU also adopted a “Declaration of Policy on the War Against the Axis,” which was voted on in a regular membership meeting and published in that same edition, calling for:

Vigilance against spies and enemies of our country; rejection and condemnation of all efforts to break up our national unity through Negro baiting, Jew baiting, and other means of dividing us; friendship with U.S. Japanese, Germans and Italians loyal to our democracy; sympathy with the unfortunate and misinformed people of Japan, Germany, and Italy, for we fight not alone in defense of our liberty and independence, but for their liberation and right to democratic rule as well, against their Fascist Dictators.

Throughout the war, the union not only abided by their “Declaration of Policy,” it also involved itself socially and politically on the waterfront by directing other unions to do the same. In June 1941, President Roosevelt signed into law Executive Order 8802, which prohibited discrimination in firms with government contracts, and while this allowed de jure equality, the SSU recognized that many Seattle unions were not acting in accordance. Initially, SSU’s tactic was to lead by example and implore other unions to follow through the use of news articles and distributed pamphlets. One such article stated, “The attitude of the Scaler’s Union may well point the way to some of the other Unions who do not as of yet recognize that racial discrimination plays into the hands of Hitler and slows up our war effort.” The language used in the Ship Scalers Union articles was radical in and of itself, but that the union also donated funds to the American Committee for the Protection of Foreign Born, and distributed such flyers demonstrates an extended and almost militant commitment.

As the war progressed, the SSU became more vocal and actively militant about their opinions. One such incident occurred on July 19th, 1944. Three members of the Ship Scalers Union were arrested for heckling the American Friends Service Committee at a public meeting in Seattle. Del Castle, Hugh DeLacy, and Fred Berry, three of the union’s most progressive members (Berry and Castle were both members of the Communist Party) claimed they did so because “the speakers favored a negotiated peace with the Axis.” Castle felt it was his duty as an American to dissent because he “didn’t like what the group was saying.” Berry went further by telling The Seattle Times that he did not favor freedom of speech for “certain groups.” Indeed, the union was able to effect changes in waterfront politics—Castle and others convinced unions to cooperate with communist sympathizers and by the end of the war, King County adopted a fair practices policy before it became state law.

The open social involvement and non-discriminatory practices of the Ship Scalers Union not only effected changes in Seattle civil rights during the war, it also led to a near inversion of the union’s racial demographics. At the conclusion of the war, Van Harrison, one of the first black men admitted to the union in 1940, guessed that the union was “about ninety-five percent black.” African Americans were drawn to the SSU in part because it represented the least skilled positions for the greatest rate of constant work, but also because the union’s policy on admitting new members was liberal and unrestricted. In 1982, Harrison recalled that “you could work for a while on a permit and then, if you had three sponsors, you could join the union.” Three sponsors would not be difficult to come by as the union enforced its anti-“Negro baiting, Jew baiting” policy among its members. In addition to three sponsors, all the application forms asked basic biographical information, the applicant’s address, veteran status, when were they discharged, and how long they worked out of the union hall. The most common reason for refusal of an application was insufficient time as a ship scaler, but usually by the next monthly general assembly meeting the applicant would be invited to join.

During and especially after WWII, many members of the Ship Scalers Union maintained dual membership in the union and on Seattle civil rights councils, making a web of influence that the union could call on at any moment in a given political situation. This trend continued throughout the union’s history, though their involvement waned in the 60s. An important moment for the union came just prior to US entry into WWII, when the SSU put its efforts towards re-electing Hugh DeLacy for city council in the 1940 election campaign. DeLacy, an English professor at the University of Washington, was a popular liberal member of the Seattle City Council with close ties with the SSU. As a councilman, DeLacy argued for reform of the city’s civil rights policies, especially in favor of overturning Seattle’s racially restrictive housing covenants. Though he was defeated in 1940, DeLacy joined Local 541 because, as one Seattle Times article put, he “sought a more ‘strenuous occupation.’” In 1944, the Ship Scalers Union again supported DeLacy in his election campaign for State Representative of Washington’s First Congressional District, which encompassed Seattle. DeLacy ran successfully as a New Deal Democrat and quickly became an advocate for labor interests and ending public housing segregation. He was defeated in Washington State’s 1946 electoral backlash against many House Democrats and returned to Seattle as a shipyard worker. His final election campaign in 1948 was again supported vehemently by Local 541, as well as other well-known political activists. Historian Quintard Taylor notes that he even published “campaign literature featuring black political activist Paul Robeson.” Although he lost, his defeat was not unique to national trends against leftist politicians. DeLacy’s campaign was outspoken about price controls and against the formation of the House Committee on Un-American Activities. DeLacy marked the peak of the Ship Scalers Union’s involvement in the national dialogue of the era, as the SSU enjoyed a direct representative in the House who supported labor rights and civil rights in the state.

Despite DeLacy’s political losses, on a local level the Ship Scalers Union was involved in city affairs throughout the 1940s and into the 1950s. As early as March of 1940 (before the union was predominantly African American), the union sat a delegate to the King County Civil Rights Committee. During WWII, the SSU sent DeLacy to the Convention of the American Committee for the Protection of the Foreign Born, arguing in Scaler’s News, “The preservation of civil rights is a vital part of a democratic war.” The union had ample motive to be involved in civil rights activism. Seattle, while it was perceived to be liberal-minded, took nine years to pass legislation on employment fair practices. In 1946, the Seattle City Council rejected a fair practices bill that would have barred restrictions on membership in unions and by employers on the grounds of race. Del Castle, then secretary-treasurer of the Ship Scalers Union, was one of the speakers named in support of the bill who gave arguments at the public hearing. The hearing was so heated that, according to a Seattle Times article published about the rejection:

Councilman M. B. Mitchell, chairman of the hearing, had to rap sharply for order after many in the audience jeered when Howard F. Smith… arose to protest the suggested ordinance….Smith, who half turned around to face the audience from his seat at the front declared that the suggested ordinance’s principle support came from “a group which tries to stir up hatred between races…whose whole program is to sabotage our economy while Soviet Russia is working day and night.

Interestingly, the same rhetoric used by Smith was used five years earlier by the Ship Scalers newsletter in support of removing racial restrictions. This suggests a more advantageous, rather than logical or ethical, form of argumentation by Seattle’s opponents of civil rights at the time. Indeed, this was undoubtedly a trigger of the increased militancy of the SSU and Seattle civil rights supporters. Castle was also a member of the Seattle Interracial Action Committee, which allied itself with other organizations including the Seattle chapter of the Civil Rights Congress. According to Quintard Taylor, the Civil Rights Congress was emerging as an activist organization, “willing to use boycotts, pickets, and demonstrations to mobilize public opinion.” These were tactics the Ship Scalers Union embraced. A 1947 photograph shows a member of the Ship Scalers Union protesting with other black members of various organizations (including the National Negro Congress and the Seattle Communist Party) in front of Atlas Grocery on 14th and Yesler in Seattle’s Central District (see Figure 1). The photograph evinces the alternative stance of organizations like the Civil Rights Council, the National Negro Congress, and the Negro Labor Congress, which reacted against the more temperate legislative and judicial measures taken by the NAACP and the Seattle Urban League. As an involved organization within Seattle’s civil rights conversation, the SSU drew national attention to itself through its activism. In 1946, it received a letter of invitation to “meet with Revels Cayton, National Executive Secretary of the National Negro Congress… because of recognition of the fact that you are deeply concerned with the affairs of our community and our country.”

In addition to being involved in civil rights issues, the early years of the Ship Scalers Union was strongly communist. Many of its key members and officers were either openly and actively Communist Party members (such as Berry and Castle), or supporters of communists (such as DeLacy). These members of the union pushed Local 541 in the direction of militant politics and sought an end to discrimination and reducing political conflict in the shipyards. Berry and Castle were the two most prominent Communist Party members in the Ship Scalers Union. Berry was one of the first black men admitted to the union in 1940, and that same year was elected business agent of the union. When Castle joined the SSU in 1940, he was a white University of Washington student, member of the Young Communist League, and was a member of the Communist Party of America. Both Berry and Castle were officers in the union, Berry as the business agent, and Castle as the secretary-treasurer, meaning together they were in charge of soliciting funds and distributing the union’s money. Under their leadership, Local 541 raised money for the Russian war relief, arguing in the Scaler’s News, “‘what would be our chances for victory be IF THE SOVIET UNION WAS NOT FIGHTING ON OUR SIDE’ – we can readily agree that the collection of funds to help them is a mighty worth while thing to do.” The union’s support of communism allowed them to participate in a more revolutionary dialogue on both a national and political level. This demonstrated that the struggle for racial equality was not just restricted to local affairs, but emphasized that it was part of a larger and more fundamental problem that affected the entire American population.

During WWII, support for communism within unions and on the waterfront lessened, but under the progressive leadership of Castle and Berry the union remained involved in communist causes. Local 541 was also mildly successful at creating an accepting environment of left laborers on the waterfronts of Seattle. In a 1982 interview, Castle articulated his goal to achieve wide support of a Communist Party Congress program that promoted a united and progressive front in the fight against fascism. One of the most evident effects of the SSU’s affiliation with Communists was when Castle was able to convince Seattle unions to adopt a “grudging acceptance of the need to cooperate with the ‘reds’… at least while the Soviet Union was an ally.” This alliance coincided with the King County Labor Council’s admittance of black workers into its ranks, indicative of the SSU’s success in Seattle at integrating communist support with civil rights reform. While Castle was electorally defeated as the secretary-treasurer in 1946, Berry was still an officer in the union until the early 60s. Despite growing opposition to the CP cause and Castle’s departure, Local 541 remained involved in communist Seattle, continuing the tradition begun during the war years.

The main effect of Castle’s election loss was a transition from open support of Communist tenets to a more general agenda for freedom of speech and political equality of voice. Just after the war, the “grudging acceptance” waned again, especially by the Scalers’ international union, the International Brotherhood of Boilermakers, affiliated with the American Federation of Labor (AFL). On Labor Day of 1946, The Ship Scalers Union defied the AFL by marching in a parade hosted by the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO). The Seattle locals of the AFL declined to march because they considered the CIO communist sympathizers. Then on April 2, 1947, Gerhard Eisler’s wife was set to speak at Moose Hall in Seattle. Eisler was a prominent Polish Communist on a tour of the United States, petitioning for funds to aid in her husband’s lawsuit against the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC). Three days before Eisler's scheduled rally, the HUAC barred her from speaking at the hall. As one of the sponsoring organizations of her tour, the SSU welcomed Eisler to instead give her speech at the Scalers Hall, raising more than three-hundred dollars for the couple’s case.

After the war, the Ship Scalers Union was able to retain its communist stance, though the lexicon of supporting rhetoric had changed. In direct response to the House Un-American Committee hearings, specifically the Canwell Committee, the SSU organized a “Lenin Memorial Rally” at their union hall in 1948. The rally was co-sponsored by the Washington State Communist Party, prompting one Seattle Times article to call it a “War Fund” in the “fight against ‘reactionism.’” The language used by both the Times and the SSU in their advertisements suggests a growing polarization with respect to the issue of the “enemy within,” and only heightened the SSU’s resolve to support political unification in the United States. In this light, the SSU’s support of communism is less a direct advocacy of orthodox communism and more of a fight for political respect, intelligent conversation, and equal representation of the citizens’ voice. Still, their affiliation with communism gave that struggle higher and more urgent stakes as representing a more important political problem.

Throughout the Ship Scalers Union’s activism in the decade following the war, their hiring hall, located at 2221 Third Avenue in Seattle’s Belltown neighborhood, acted as the seat of influence and locus of radical and leftist laborers in Seattle, including a broader community and civic center near the waterfront. Even though the SSU was not affiliated with the CIO, in 1949 they hosted in their hall a convention of the CIO Council. What was termed by The Seattle Times as an attempt “to reunite all CIO unions in Seattle,” highlights the SSU’s commitment to unity among laborers, regardless of affiliation. [46] Later that same year, and recalling the Lenin Rally of 1948 at Ship Scalers Hall, the SSU held a “Public Protest Rally” on October 20th. The rally was sponsored by the Non-Partisan Committee to Defend Civil Rights and described its aim in a quarter-page paid advertisement in The Seattle Times: “For a public protest against the recent conviction of 11 Communist leaders. If you would free the nation from discrimination against minority groups, racial prejudices and fascism—attend this rally” (see Figure 2).

The years 1949-50 were perhaps the busiest years for the use of the Ship Scalers Hall as a congregating place for progressives in Seattle, holding on average one rally, featured speaker, or convention every two to three months. In a follow-up speech to the Public Protest Rally, the Ship Scalers Union brought the defense attorney for the eleven Communist Party leaders to the hall in 1950 just after the trial’s conclusion. By far, the most significant voice the SSU was able to draw to Seattle was that of W.E.B. Du Bois, founder of the NAACP, in 1951. Du Bois, 83 at the time, gave a speech titled “Peace and Freedom.” Beyond the political gatherings though, the Ship Scalers Hall played host to the Seattle Philharmonic and Choral Society who practiced each Friday night there in the early 50s and screened movies in its large hiring hall. One 1952 flyer advertised Peace Shall Win, and Mr. Smith Goes to Washington (see Figure 3). In “an era when communists and socialists organized workers with an urgent sense of mission,” as Dick Clever describes it, the Ship Scalers Hall played the role of the Roman Forum, a place for political discussion, social gossip, job opportunities, and plain old low-brow entertainment.

Eventually, the judiciousness of organizations such as the NAACP and the Seattle Urban League won out against the backdrop of the House Un-American Committee hearings. Organizations worried that their politics and methods would be taken as a pairing of civil rights agendas and “leftist” elements, a contemporary euphemism for “Communist.” Indeed, in 1949, Albert F. Canwell, a state legislator from Spokane, rearticulated the notion given by Howard Smith by saying, “If someone insists there is discrimination against Negroes in this Country, or that there is inequality of wealth, there is every reason to believe that person is a Communist.” As a result of the national changing opinion toward communism, the SSU not only distanced itself from communist politics, but also ceased to associate actively with civil rights reform in order to avoid associating equal rights with communism, much like the NAACP and the Urban League sought to do through the democratic process. In a sense, the SSU was tainted by its Communist Party ties and any activism would be seen in that light by a dissenting public. Consequently, vehement anti-communism limited the extent of the SSU’s influence on civil rights change.

By the mid-1950s, Local 541 retreated from an activist role and resigned itself to manage politics that were, according to Clever, “directed toward the ‘bread and butter’ issues” of running the union and dealing with employers and contracts. This is partly reflected in the meeting minutes throughout the 1950s, which dealt primarily with such issues and occasionally mentioning some form of civic involvement. In March of 1955, the SSU voted to donate twenty-five dollars to a strike of electrical workers against the Westinghouse Electrical Company for better working conditions and wages. At the same meeting, they moved to send a letter expressing “support for Montgomery, Alabama bus boycott.” Throughout the 1950s and into the 1960s, there are traces of the union’s imprint on the national scene of civil rights reform, sending letters to President Kennedy and to the city of Birmingham, expressing disgust at the 16th Street Baptist Church bombings. Aside from these notable instances, the union largely retreated from progressive politics. As a former vocal and active participant in local affairs, the Ship Scalers Union became only tacitly involved in civil rights politics when they came up, but was no longer abl"																		
 to be an instigator of civil rights reform by itself.																					
In 1959		 the union was forced to sell its Belltown hiring hall and relocate to 2313 E. Madison St. in Seattle’s Central District. This move marked a significant transition from Local 541’s public activism in the 1940s and 50s to its last quarter-century of internal struggle and episodes of mismanagement. This is not to say that the union completely removed itself from progressive affairs	 but that the primary focus of the union after 1960 was either internal or specifically related to its members. One of the most poignant moments for the union came in 1965	 when then president Van Harrison was part of a panel discussion titled	 “Are Labor Unions the Lost Sheep of Social Reform?” This reflects not only the Ship Scalers Union’s limited political participation	 but also the growing trend of unions losing effectuality in areas outside of strict labor reform. Just one year earlier	 Harrison was an idealistic member of the King County Economic Opportunities Board as part of the city’s anti-poverty campaign. The board was a fledgling campaign at best	 foreshadowed by The Seattle Times headline about its slow beginnings: “Antipoverty Board Off on ‘One Wing.’”													
The SSU’S move to the Central District was symbolically important. The SSU’s new location in the north end of the Central District demonstrated an increased solidarity with the city’s black community in sprit and necessity. By 1960		 Seattle’s black population was 26	901	 and according to Quintard Taylor	 about seventy-five percent of them “lived in four Central District census tracts	 and by 1965	 eight out of ten black residents lived there – the highest percentage in the city’s history”. It is thus not surprising that the Ship Scalers Union chose to relocate in the northern business area of the Central District (see Figure 4). For the most part	 Local 541 let bolder organizations lead the fight for civil rights in the 60s	 occasionally throwing their name in as a supporting organization. This retraction may have to do simply with the relocation of the union hall out of the centrally located neighborhood of Belltown	 and the considerable size difference between the halls. The new union hall was significantly smaller and lacked an auditorium	 preventing the SSU from staging wide-scale rallies or major events in the new building.										
By the early 60s		 there was growing idealism among African Americans in Seattle	 and a reaction against the efficacy of the 1950s NAACP and Seattle Urban League. Inspired by national movements	 Taylor writes that African Americans in the Central District engaged in “direct action campaigning to end job bias	 housing discrimination	 and de facto school segregation in Seattle as an integral part of the national effort to eradicate racism	 empower African Americans	 and achieve the full and final democratization of the United States.” Despite some successes	 the majority of African Americans living in 1960s Seattle were disheartened by failures	 especially in relation to school segregation. Taylor argues that Seattle’s minority residents “sought instead to build a community within the Central District free of the economic and psychological control of white Seattle.” It is in this context that the SSU hall location and their transition away from overt militancy becomes significant. At first glance	 it may seem to represent a deeper entrenchment within Seattle’s black community	 but in actuality	 it was a move inwards that prefigured the trend of many Seattle civil rights organizations later in the decade.								
Even though the 1960s marked a decline in social activism for the Ship Scalers Union		 it remained dedicated to improving working conditions for members	 retaining at least some of the vigor of the early days of the union. The most significant event of the decade for the Local 541 was in fact three separate strikes at the Lockheed Shipyard over a period of four years from 1966 to 1970. The first strike occurred between August 25-29	 1966 over a reported dispute about supervision of the SSU being transferred outside the union. On the first day	 140 members of the union left work at ten in the morning to attend an internal meeting about the change in supervision. They stayed on strike for the next four days until a settlement was reached that allowed unionized ship scalers to remain under the supervision of nine-year ship scaler veteran James Wilson. While the dispute was in essence only with Lockheed	 it represented a greater theme in the history of the SSU’s quest for autonomous working conditions and supervision. In much the same way that the Ship Scalers Union sought to free the country of fascists during WWII	 they now narrowed their scope and demanded the right to work as a unified group within Seattle’s maritime industry under familiar leadership. As a continuation of the union’s activism	 the Lockheed dispute effectively galvanized support for solidarity among ship scalers working in Seattle’s yards.													
The second strike further reflected the union’s desire for familiar leadership		 but this time with racial overtones	 signifying a desire to remain involved in civil rights	 even if on a smaller scale. In late December of 1967	 Lockheed changed supervisors without announcing it to the SSU in order to avoid a strike. Instead	 the roughly 170 ship scalers working at Lockheed walked out again on January 3	 1968 one week after Painter’s Union member Rube Plunge was named as supervisor. By January 9th	 a settlement was reached that removed Plunge and instated a member of Local 541 named George Walker as the ship scalers’ supervisor. The SSU argument was two-fold: They argued that scalers “were being deprived of their own supervision	” and that the change in supervisors was due “partly to discrimination” because	 as the Seattle Times reported	 “Wilson and Walker are Negroes. Plunge is Caucasian. A majority of members of the union is Negro.” The fact that this strike was directly attributed to race is important. It demonstrates the SSU’s belief that the equal employment on the waterfront was neither complete nor totally equal. Furthermore	 the Ship Scalers Union’s ability to mobilize and support its rank and file to achieve its ends illustrates the influence they still wielded at the end of the 1960s.									
Even though Del Castle		 Fred Berry	 and Hugh DeLacy departed from the union and the Ship Scalers Union moved away from the waterfront	 the SSU still supported its own workers and remained involved with workers’ issues throughout its existence. The final strike in the series of disputes occurred in October of 1970	 when 175 Ship Scalers walked off Lockheed’s shipyard again. This strike was not regarding supervision	 but the computing of vacation pay as well as the handling of fiberglass in the shipyard that became part of the Ship Scalers Union’s contract with Lockheed in July of 1968. The strike only lasted two days and ended in a grudging settlement by Lockheed to pay back vacation and $282.88 to every worker as premium pay for handling the fiberglass. According to secretary-treasurer/business manager Van Harrison	 disputes with Lockheed were occurring since 1959 and the 1970 strike represented the culminating point. It also was one of the last battles the SSU fought outside their union	 as the next decade and a half would be marked by internal struggles with their international affiliate.													
The Ship Scalers Union’s relationship with the Laborers International Union of North America (LIUNA) was strained almost from the beginning of their affiliation and culminated in an irresolvable dispute with LIUNA in the 1980s		 ultimately leading Local 541 to be dissolved and control of their jurisdiction transferred to another local. Their relationship began in 1956 when the SSU disaffiliated with the International Brotherhood of Boilermakers and sought affiliation with the International Hod Carriers’	 Building and Common Laborers Union of America. Initially	 the Ship Scalers Union’s motives for the change in affiliation were more or less practical. A Seattle Times article described the SSU as “having been cast off” from the Boilermakers	 and “forced to seek affiliation with the Laborers’ International.” Most of the West Coast Ship Scalers unions were at the time affiliated with the Hod Carriers	 so it is not a surprising move because the Ship Scalers Union had to ensure its bargaining strength with employers. In their application for charter to the Hod Carriers	 the union listed only 400 members	 a relatively small and manageable union by the standards of the day. Indeed	 the SSU itself was clandestine about the nature of its departure from the Boilermakers. In the meeting minutes of an officers meeting	 George E. Flood argued that a letter sent to the Hod Carriers need not be “in complete accordance with all the specific details [of their motives for the affiliation change].” This seems to suggest either a significant dispute with the Boilermakers or that the Ship Scalers Union preferred to withhold information from the Hod Carriers	 or possibly only that the motives did not concern the Hod Carriers.										
Whatever the reasons for changing affiliation		 the Hod Carriers represented a better and brighter future for the members. The 1956 preamble of the Hod Carriers constitution argued “that all human-kind is created equal	 and are entitled to the basic human right of providing a living for themselves and their families…. [and] that all people of the earth who labor for the advancement of capital are entitled to an equitable share of said advancement	 as well as the right to organize and to achieve advancement through collective [sic] bargaining.” This was similar language the Ship Scalers Union used in its push for equal opportunity employment	 and half a decade earlier when rigorously supporting communism. In the mid-1950s	 many Boilermakers locals either discriminated against admitting black members or established quotas for minority workers. It was more than likely that partial motivation lay in the SSU’s hopes to have a strong and progressive international to support their own forward agenda. This mutually beneficial relationship did not develop and instead LIUNA became representative of the dictatorial governance that the union fought strongly against during WWII.															
Prior to official affiliation with the Hod Carriers		 the Ship Scalers Union were disputing with the local of the Hod Carriers. A 1955 letter sent to both unions from a non-affiliated waterfront attorney lists mutually agreed upon terms of settlement that were resolved on February 4th of that year. The dispute was over jurisdiction in the cleaning of ships	 specifically how jurisdiction changed depending on whether the entire boiler was to be removed or not. While a relatively minor dispute	 it signified a long history of strife. In 1958	 the letter was sent again	 this time by an attorney of the Hod Carriers	 explicitly “reminding the Ship Scalers of their agreement	” who apparently were still performing duties that were allotted to the Hod Carriers. The Seattle Times historian Dick Clever called it an “uneasy relationship at best	” revealing that the Hod Carriers “insisted on collecting half of all monthly dues paid by members of Local 541	 regardless of whether the local received services for its money	” which the majority of the time it did not. Instead the fees	 augmented by poor management	 nearly bankrupted the SSU.								
The fourteen-year “irresolvable dispute” with LIUNA		 which ended in the transfer of control of Local 541	 began in 1972 when the general membership of the union attempted to remove Secretary-Treasurer Van Harrison from office. A generous and involved president of the union	 Harrison ran for the joint position of secretary-treasurer/business agent in 1968 and won. The two positions were combined in the early 60s to save on salary costs; this meant that the officer in charge of incoming funds and the officer in control of spending were the same person. In a union without a strong history in bookkeeping	 this was an ominous move. As far back as 1955	 a Labor Department audit “scolded the business manager for not being able to account for large quantities of cash.” As supported as Harrison was in his election to the position	 he was equally desired gone by 1972. An election was held in which Oscar Hearde ran against Harrison in an electoral meeting that was adjourned because of rampant disorder (see Figure 5). Among the charges lobbied against Harrison were: Refusal to allow members to see financial reports; lack of record keeping for receipts; and	 most egregious	 the unilateral transfer of jurisdiction of work for certain tasks away from the members of the Ship Scalers Union in the shipyards. Harrison was eventually suspended (along with Lucius “Lucky” Jackson)	 but LIUNA backed Harrison and Jackson by invoking a technicality of the union’s by-laws and reinstated them both in 1973 (see Figure 6). [76] LIUNA’s heavy-handed action of the Harrison-Jackson affair marked the beginning of the SSU’s struggle for management of its own affairs. After a series of hearings in 1973	 most of the rank and file was disillusioned with LIUNA	 and many	 including Hearde	 retreated from union politics. In the remaining years of the decade	 as far as most members were concerned	 the union was reduced to a hiring hall.					
The 1980s marked the total decline and fall of the Ship Scalers Union. In 1980		 another reform candidacy was attempted when Bob Barnes	 a younger	 white member of the union	 convinced Hearde to run again. Together they ran for the respective positions of secretary treasurer and business agent on a platform of reform	 arguing it was poor accounting to have the positions combined. These claims were not unfounded. A 1979 audit of the union’s financial records revealed $13	750.78 missing from Harrison’s books and union funds. Eventually the union was reimbursed for the missing funds by the corporation which bonded with Harrison and produced a check specifically noted “for loss caused by Van Harrison.” Together Heard and Barnes advocated for change in the union’s internal affairs by calling for more accountability. Again	 their election was contested by the LIUNA-backed Harrison and began a six-year battle of court cases in which the SSU continued to seek more independence from LIUNA	 which was having its own international officers indicted on racketeering charges in Washington D. C. The series of court cases brought the union into further financial despair	 and paired with the economic troubles in Seattle industries in the 80s	 directly contributed to the end of the union.										
In 1980		 the union listed a total of 837 members with roughly ninety percent of them working	 but by 1986	 The Seattle Post-Intelligencer noted that membership dropped by a third “to 550	 with less than half working.” Waning membership and hard economic times caused the union to fall behind in payments to various creditors as well as LIUNA	 who said that Local 541 stopped paying dues in 1984. Finally in May of 1986	 LIUNA suspended Local 541 for “failing to pay $60	000 in affiliation fees and pension contributions” and for owing upwards of $135	000 to its creditors. In April	1986	 Oscar Hearde published the article	 “An urgent appeal to Seattle Citizens for help” in The Facts	 a Central District progressive newspaper. In it	 Hearde attributed the union’s financial failures of the union specifically to the “Reagan Administration	” arguing that Reagan “failed to send enough work to the shipyards in the Northwest to supply the work necessary to keep our membership employed.” The appeal was to raise money to keep the SSU in Seattle	 but ultimately the union was forced to sell its E. Madison headquarters to pay their debts and control of the union was subsequently transferred to Local 252 in Tacoma. Despite its lackluster finale	 the Ship Scalers Union was dissolved amid controversy that existed since the union’s founding in the mid-1930s. In his appeal	 Hearde wrote that the Ship Scalers Union possessed “a long history of being the most integrated	 industrial Union of the Northwest	” and it is “one of the only Unions in the Northwest willing to stand up for the rights of our membership against what we consider to be the dictatorial powers of the International.”	
Despite Local 541’s shortcomings in its later years as a financial institution		 it managed to leave a lasting impression on the soul of Seattle’s civil rights movement and in the corpus of the city. According to Del Castle	 the early years of the union were led by idealists and was among the first to “challenge housing discrimination and prompted the first lunch-counter ‘sit-ins’ in the city.” Beyond these policy and social changes though	 there are two highly recognizable and visible physical remnants of the SSU’s impact in Seattle: A commissioned mural which still hangs in the city and the changing of a street name which runs through Seattle’s Central District.																	
1945 perhaps marked the highest union accomplishment in their involvement with the national dialogue. Mexican muralist Pablo O’Higgins agreed to paint a mural depicting the SSU’s history as a strongly anti-racist		 anti-discriminatory	 and progressive force in social politics. O’Higgins was in Seattle on the invitation of a University of Washington faculty member to give a visiting workshop on fresco painting at the university. Union officials who were familiar with his fresco work in Mexico approached him and asked him to do a mural for the auditorium of their Belltown union hall. According to O’Higgins	 “It will portray the struggle against racial discrimination and the unity of international labor as one of the most important developments for future peace.” O’Higgins solicited opinions from members of the union about what should be included in the mural and “for three weeks before I even planned this mural… I went out to the shipyards and talked to the workers—got their ideas and suggestions as to what they would like.” Del Castle himself is portrayed in the mural in the lower right-hand corner	 “whimsically” sporting a hammer and sickle on his lapel (see Figure 7).																
The 58-foot		 thirteen-panel mural marked the peak of the union’s involvement and its history in many ways parallels the history of the SSU. When the union was forced to move out of Belltown in 1959	 the mural was donated to the University of Washington and lost until February of 1975	 when it was discovered in an outdoor storage area on the university’s campus. After a series of ownership disputes that lasted until 1977	 the mural was to be placed at the Chicano cultural center El Centro de la Raza in Beacon Hill. The transfer would be effected once El Centro could raise enough money to have the panels transported there and ensure preservation safety in their building. Until then	 the mural was to hang in Kane Hall	 the main auditorium building at the University of Washington. The agreement between the University of Washington and El Centro was that the UW would pay for restoration costs	 and El Centro would pay for transportation and new fixtures for their building. It seems that El Centro did not raise enough money as the mural is still hanging today on the second floor of Kane Hall on the university’s campus. The mural itself depicts the SSU at its most active period of history and is representative of the SSU’s social involvement and publicity by containing	 according to Clever	 “all the clichés and idealized visions of the revolution that Castle and others had hoped would spread to American shores.” That the mural remains visible to the public today is a testament to the Ship Scalers Union early and militant social commitment.											
The final bout of the Ship Scalers Union came in 1982 with the city-wide controversy over the change in name of Seattle’s Empire Way to Martin Luther King Jr. Way. The Ship Scalers Union was central to the organization boycotting Empire Way stores that opposed the name change and ultimately proved successful for signing the bill into law. In the summer of 1982		 the Seattle City Council approved a motion to change the name of Empire Way	 a major South End and Central District arterial. The vote was cast and the name change would be signed into law and take effect later that year. In between the council vote and signing it into law	 many merchants on the eight-mile stretch of road formed the Empire Way Merchants’ Association in protest and lobbied the city not to change the name on the grounds of the financial burdens it would cause the stores to change their stationary and signs	 and the city to change its street signs.																
In direct response to the Association		 many Central District residents formed the Coalition for Respect and began boycotting Association stores. The Ship Scalers Union acted as liaison of the Coalition	 issuing press releases	 flyers	 and aiding in organizing boycotts. The contention over MLK Way was one of the most important local issues of the 80s	 in part because it affected so many merchants	 but primarily because of what it revealed about Seattle’s racial myopia. In fact	 violence began at one boycott in early September	 1982 when patrons and the owner of the Empire Way Tavern began verbally harassing picketers. According to a Coalition press release in The Facts	 “the tavern owner shouted racist insults	 made other threatening and argumentative remarks	 and pushed one African American woman. She then punched a white male picketer in the face	 knocking off his glasses	 and called him a ‘White nigger.’” While the rhetoric was more tempered by the Coalition	 their charges were not insubstantial. In one SSU flyer	 the union argued	 “It really gets down to some people just not wanting a street in front of their place named after a Black man…. This attitude	 which is at the root of the movement to block the name change	 displays a total lack of sensitivity to the fact that much of the money these merchants take is from Blacks and others who Dr. King spoke for.” Eventually	 the bill was signed into law and the street was renamed	 though it is doubtful such a victory was possible without the aid of the Coalition for Respect and the Ship Scalers Union’s resurgent activism amid the city’s growing complacency regarding discrimination.
Through its periods of advocacy		 the union seemed to maintain sight of its original values	 preserving that rhetoric in all progressive stances it took. In the end	 the union was unable to make a comeback from years of mismanagement and its disputes with LIUNA	 but Local 541 of the Ship Scalers Union presented Seattle with a challenge to change its atrophied stance toward race relations during its effectual fifty-year history. Through its militancy and progressive voices	 the SSU contributed to a lasting alteration of Seattle’s racial climate. The union’s activism signifies something beyond the gestalt of its members; it highlights the racial struggles Seattle and the nation underwent throughout the 20th century and causes a re-evaluated imagining of Seattle’s progressivism. Even though the Ship Scalers Union itself was neglected in its later years by its international	" the SSU continued to subvert Seattle’s refusal to acknowledge its own minority residents."""														
"Simer, Jeremy"		Jeremy Simer papers	"University of Washington alumnus and student activist.

Jeremy Orhan Simer attended the University of Washington from 1995 to 1998, and received a Bachelor of Arts degree."																		
"Simpson, Roger, 1937-"		Roger A. Simpson papers	"Professor of communications., University of Washington.

Roger Simpson joined the University of Washington faculty in 1968. During his tenure, his areas of interest included communication history, law of communication, media economics and editorial journalism. In 1961, Simpson completed a masters thesis for the University of Wisconsin in which he examined the American Newspaper Guild and the Seattle Post-Intelligencer strike of 1936."																		
"Sims, Beverly E."		Beverly Sims papers	"Sims was born and raised in Seattle. After attending the University of Washington, she worked for Boeing before becoming a secretary at the Northwest Labor and Employment Law Office (now the Legacy of Equality, Leadership, and Organizing).

While at LELO, Sims became involved in Seattle’s radical politics through her friendship with, and later marriage to, Tyree Scott, the leader of the United Construction Workers Association (UCWA). In 1975, Sims entered the apprenticeship program of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (IBEW) Local 46— the same union that Scott belonged to— through a court-ordered affirmative action plan specifically for black workers. She was the third black woman to ever enter the program, and the first to complete it. She left the trades in the early 1980s following the birth of her son, Seth, and later worked for King County's HIV/ AIDS prevention program.

Source: http://depts.washington.edu/civilr/sims.htm"																		
Skowronek (Family : Emil Skowronek : 1920-1979)		Skowronek Family papers	"Emil Skowronek (aka Clark) (1904-1993) was born in Poland and immigrated to the United States as a young boy. Skowronek graduated high school in Tacoma. As a young man, Skowronek worked as a logger on the Olympic Peninsula for five years to fund his education at Washington State University, where he was a member of the wrestling team. While he worked as a logger, he was radicalized by the Industrial Workers of the World. Skowronek was a member of the Communist Party USA and served as a left wing labor organizer who (according to family lore) helped found the Seattle Ship Scaler's union in 1936. Skowroneck later became a ship rigger in the International Brotherhood of Boilermakers, Iron Ship Builders, Blacksmiths, Forgers, and Helpers, Local 104 (Seattle, Washington) and served as a business agent in the union. During World War II, Skowronek served in the merchant marine, where he was involved in the Battle of Okinawa. He lost his seamen's clearance for his political affiliations during the ""Red Scare"" of the 1950s, but was able to regain it.

Skowronek married Edna Theodosia Bundry in 1935. Edna Theodosia Skowroneck (1903-1976), graduated in 1932 with Bachelor's of Science in nursing from the University of Washington. She worked as a registered nurse.

Theodosia Skowronek ""Theo"" Nassar (1939-), Emil and Edna's daughter, recieved her BA in Sociology from Washington State University and her MS in Teaching/Communications from Gonzaga University, working as a caseworker at Eastern State Mental Hospital and a copywriter and journalist in Spokane before moving to Los Angeles to become a screenwriter for ten years.

Felix Skowronek (1935-2006), Emil and Edna's son, played principal flute for the Seattle Symphony from 1956–1957 and 1959–1960. Skowronek also played in the Seventh Army Symphony from 1957–1959, Puerto Rico Symphony Orchestra 1960–1966, and St. Louis Symphony 1966–1968, and was a member of the Casals Festival Orchestra in Puerto Rico and was a founding member of the Soni Ventorum Wind Quintet. He became a member of the faculty of the Conservatory of Music of Puerto Rico, followed by the University of Washington, where he taught for 38 years, and served as president of the National Flute Association and Seattle Flute Society. He was a leading figure in the revival of wooden Boehm-style flutes in the USA and an expert in the use of various hardwoods in flute manufacturing."																		
"Smith, James M., 1949-"		James M. Smith audio recordings and papers	"James M. ""Jim"" Smith was born on March 21, 1949 in Oakland, California. He moved with his family to Washington state as teenager and graduated from Cascade High School in 1967. After high school, he served two tours of duty in Vietnam in the Navy. He then spent forty years working through the Laborers' International Union of North America (LIUNA), Local 292 in Everett, Washington. He served as President of his Local as well as other offices. Smith was also a delegate to the Snohomish Central Labor Council. From the mid-1990s to 2017, Smith produced ""Radio Labor Journal"" for KSER 90.7 FM (Everett, Washington). The weekly program was one of only two radio shows in the Western US dedicated solely to working family issues.

Source: http://www.legacy.com/obituaries/heraldnet/obituary.aspx?n=james-m-smith&pid=186490576"																		
Socialist Labor Party (Wash.). Seattle Section		Socialist Labor Party Seattle Section records	"The Seattle Section of the Socialist Labor Party (SLP) was founded in the early 1890's as a branch of the Socialist Labor Party of America. The SLP was founded as a Marxist political party in 1876, the first nationwide socialist party in the United States. The party promoted the doctrines of Daniel DeLeon, theorist of the SLP, which advocated a classless, stateless, industrial democracy in which private property would be abolished and all natural resources and means of production would be operated by the workers through Socialist Industrial Unions. The SLP planned to achieve its goals through national and local elections and by capturing the trade union movement. However, the party's narrow sectarian ideology, its insistence on doctrinal unity and party discipline, together with its rejection of social reform alienated it from the trade union movement. After modest success in the 1890s, the party declined and never numbered more than a few thousand. It survived however, and continued to run candidates for national and state office.

The Socialist Labor Party was the first socialist organization of any importance in the Pacific Northwest but it never established ties with the labor movement and never developed beyond a small cadre. During the period documented by these papers, 1930-1962, the Section frequently consisted of fewer than six active members and at times, particularly in the early 1950s, nearly ceased to exist. Section Seattle experienced frequent internal dissent, occasionally expelled members and was, in 1944, itself censured, expelled from the Party and reorganized. The business of the Section was carried on by an organizer who was democratically chosen and who reported to the secretary of the State Executive Committee. The State Executive Committee answered to the National Executive Committee which was headed by the National Secretary, an office held by Arnold Peterson throughout this period. The official organ of the Party was the "																		
"Starkovich, George"		George Starkovich ephemera collection	"George Starkovich was a senior gardener at the University of Washington and the local president of Washington Federation of State Employees Local 1488 president. He was very active as a planner and participant in the 1999 World Trade Organization Seattle Ministerial Conference protests. George Starkovich began working as a gardener at the University of Washington in January of 1965, and quickly became involved in an organizing drive on behalf of his union, WFSE Local 1488. Starkovich was an experienced union organizer who had served as secretary of a miner’s union and shop steward at a plywood plant in Bellingham."																		
"Stedman, Vernon R."		Vernon R. Stedman Papers	"Vernon R. Stedman (1916-1993) was a National Labor Bureau researcher and labor negotiator for maritime unions. In the 1950s he studied economics at the University of Washington, and conducted research for a dissertation tentatively entitled ""Development of Collective Bargaining in the Puget Sound Inland Waterways Industry."" The project dealt largely with the history of the Inlandboatmen's Union of the Pacific (IBU), but also to some extent the Marine Engineers' Beneficial Association (MEBA) and the Masters, Mates and Pilots (MMP). In his research he consulted with John M. Fox, who became Business Manager and President of the IBU after also serving with the MMP, and with Clyde W. Deal, who helped form the IBU and who went on to work in the United States Department of Labor's Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service. Stedman did not complete his dissertation."																		
"Stein, Ben, approximately 1890-"		Ben Stein papers	"Born around 1890 in the Russian-controlled Belarusian city of Minsk, Ben Stein arrived as an immigrant to the United States in 1915. Initially landing in Seattle, he soon traveled east across the country and tried his hand at a series of professions. Stein never returned to Russia, but instead chose to settle in the Seattle area for the remainder of his life. After working in the luggage business for a time, Stein began to sell insurance in Seattle with his cousin, M.N. Ketzlach. Though his work as an insurance agent provided him with his primary source of income, the true focus of his energy was his involvement with Seattle's Jewish community. Stein served as the financial secretary for the Seattle branch of the Workmen's Circle, an organization that provided fiscal, cultural, and educational support to Jewish citizens in the area."																		
"Stone, Jen"		Jen Stone WTO Seattle Protests collection																			
Tacoma Civic Ballet		Tacoma Civic Ballet records	"The Tacoma Civic Ballet, a not-for-profit organization, debuted its first performance in 1964. It staged public performances by a resident company. Board members included Nancy C. Thomas."																		
"Temcov, Joanne L. (Joanne Little)"		Joanne Temcov papers	"Joanne Little Temcov (1926-) is a labor organizer and women’s rights advocate. She was born in Montesano, Washington and studied drama at the University of Washington. In the 1960s and 1970s she worked in various roles: Interviewer, Washington State Employment Security Department; Secretary and then President, American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME) Local 435; Executive Board member, Washington Federation of State Employees (WFSE); and Industrial Relations Agent, Washington State Department of Labor and Industries. In the 1970s and 1980s Temcov was an active member of the National Organization for Women (NOW), the Coalition of Labor Union Women (CLUW), and the Women's Political Caucus. She also served as the secretary of the Pacific Northwest Labor History Association (PNLHA)."																		
"Thode, Kay"		Kay Thode Papers	"Social worker and welfare policy analyst Kay Thode worked as Director of the Seattle Urban League's Health and Welfare Department from 1968 to 1983. She subsequently worked as a planner for the King County Health Planning Council, a subarea council of the Puget Sound Health Systems Agency. Throughout her career she was tireless in advocating and lobbying for the rights of welfare recipients and the poor, and testified frequently before local, state, and federal government bodies. She was active in the Puget Sound Chapter of the National Association of Social Workers, serving as Newsletter Editor, President, and delegate to NASW's national assembly several times. At the organization's national level she was chair of the National Committee on Women's Issues and was a member of the National Social Policy and Action Cabinet. She was named Social Worker of the Year by the Puget Sound Council in 1972, and by the Washington State Chapter in 1979. She was also active in the Washington Association for Social Welfare, presenting a paper at its conference on The Worth of Work in, 1977, and serving as keynote speaker at its 1978 legislative conference. She was elected President of the organization in October 1979. She initiated the group Washington State Friends of Welfare Rights to support the activities of the Washington State and National Welfare Rights Organizations, and served on the boards of the Washington Coalition for a National Health Program, the Council of Planning Affiliates Legislative Comittee, Neighborhood Health Centers, the Fair Budget Action Campagn, the Welfare Rights Organizing Committee, and People for Fair Taxes. She also served on advisory committees for entities including King County Hospital, the Washington State Department of Social and Health Services, and Seattle City Light. Thode's husband Bob Thode appeared before the anti-Left Canwell Committee during the Red Scare of the 1950s--partly because of her activism."																		
"Tippett, Tom"		Tom Tippett manuscript	"Tom Tippett: Former editor of newspaper of the Aeronautical Machinists Union's, International Association of Machinists District Lodge 751."																		
"Tuohy, Albert, 1895-1966"		Albert Tuohy papers	Albert Tuohy managed the Hanford Street Grain Elevator in Seattle during the 1930s and 1940s and had a close working relationship with many longshore workers.																		
Twin City Central Labor Union		Twin City Central Labor Union minutes	"Twin City Central Labor Union was a regional joint labor council for union locals in the area of the cities of Chehalis and Centralia, Washington. Affilated with the Washington State Federation of Labor and the American Federation of Labor, it represented union workers and was comprised of officers and delegates drawn from the local unions in the region."																		
"Tyler, Jerry, 1911-2005"		Jerry Tyler papers	"Jerry Tyler became active in organized labor in the 1940s, and remained active throughout his career as a longshoreman. This activism led to his work as a radio broadcaster in 1948 when the Seattle CIO Industrial Union Council, for which Tyler was secretary, decided to start a radio program. Tyler also authored a number of books, focusing primarily on ""pulp fiction"" in the 1930s and on non-fiction later in his life."																		
"International Typographical Union. Local 99 (Seattle, Wash.)"		International Typographical Union Local 99 records	"Local 99 resulted from mergers in 1974 of various locals whose records are represented here. Seattle (Local 202), and Tacoma (Local 170) are the largest. Bremerton (Local 699), Bellingham (Local 355) and Olympia (Local 142) are also represented in the collection."																		
Michael Honey	Q16226154	Michael K. Honey Papers	"Michael Honey received his Ph.D. in history from Northern Illinois University in 1988 and an MA in history from Howard University in 1978. He taught at University of Maryland, Wesleyan University, and University of Puget Sound, taking a post-doc at the Stanford Humanities Center in 1989. In 1990 he became a founding faculty of the University of Washington, Tacoma, helping to devise the curriculum for the Interdisciplinary Arts and Sciences Program (now a School of UWT). He initiated and taught the first black history and labor history courses; and with Kathie Friedman Kasaba, a sociologist, he designed the Ethnic, Gender and Labor Studies curriculum (now a major in IAS). Honey initiated the Ernie Tanner Labor and Ethnic Studies Center and worked closely with ILWU Local 23 and with African American churches in developing public programs in the community on labor and black freedom movement studies. He worked closely with the National Civil Rights Museum in Memphis and continued his links to organizing and research in the South, where he had been the southern director of a civil liberties organization before going to graduate school. He held the Harry Bridges Endowed Chair of Labor Studies, 2000-2004; later became a vice-president and president of the Labor and Working-Class History Association; and has continued to work with the Pacific Northwest Labor History Association since he came to Tacoma. Honey received awards from the Guggenheim Foundation, the National Endowment for the Humanities, and other grants for his labor and civil rights and Martin Luther King studies, and book awards from the Robert F. Kennedy Foundation, the Organization of American Historians, the Southern Historical Association, the State of Washington and the United Association of Labor Educators for his four monographs in labor and civil rights history and his edited volume of King’s labor speeches. His files include numerous oral histories, research in southern labor and African American history and music, teaching materials, and documents of his professional growth as a historian with wide national recognition and as a faculty member at the University of Washington, and as the Fred and Dorothy Haley endowed Professor of Humanities at the UW Tacoma."																		
(No origination name found.)		"""The Union is Right at Boeing"" bumper sticker"																			
UNITE HERE (Organization). Local 8		UNITE HERE! Local 8 records	"UNITE HERE is an international labor union in the United States and Canada with roughly 300,000 active members. The union represents workers in the hotel, food service, laundry, warehouse, and casino gaming industries. The union was formed by a 2004 merger of two international unions: the Union of Needletrades, Industrial, and Textile Employees (UNITE) and Hotel Employees and Restaurant Employees Union (HERE).

In 2005, UNITE HERE withdrew from the AFL-CIO and joined the Change to Win Federation, along with several other unions, including the Teamsters, Service Employees International Union (SEIU) and the UFCW. In May 2009, union president Bruce Raynor (originally from UNITE) left UNITE HERE, taking with him numerous local unions and between 105,000 and 150,000 members, mostly garment workers and a labor-owned bank, Amalgamated Bank. They formed a new SEIU affiliate called Workers United. In 2009, UNITE HERE re-affiliated with the AFL-CIO.

HERE local unions in larger cities were typically organized on a craft basis, with separate organizations for job classifications such as cooks, waitresses, waiters, bartenders and hotel employees. Where separate craft local unions existed, there was often a Local Joint Executive Board which coordinated between the craft locals. UNITE HERE! Local 8 was formed in 2004 as a result of the merger of the Union of Needletrades, Industrial and Textile Employees (UNITE) and the Hotel and Restaurant Employees Union (HERE). It represents workers in the hospitality industry in Oregon and Washington. Local 8 of the Hotel, Motel and Restaurant Employees Union was formed in 1984 by a merger of Puget Sound-area locals 3, 33, 487, 551, and 596. Other local unions in Washington and Oregon later merged into Local 8 as well."																		
"United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America. Local 1289 (Seattle, Wash.)"		United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America Local 1289 records	Trade union organization. Local 1289 is a Seattle affiliate of the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America.																		
"United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America. Local 131 (Seattle, Wash.)"		"United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, Local 131 Records"	Trade union organization. Local 131 is a Seattle affiliate of the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America.																		
"United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America. District Council (Seattle, Wash.)."		United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America District Council Seattle records	"City-wide coordinating body for affiliated local unions. Along with the Carpenters and Joiners of America, the organizations included in this accession are the Central Labor Council of Seattle and Vicinity, Northwest Chapter of Associated General Contractors of America, Seattle Department of Lighting, and Washington State Council of the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America."																		
United Faculty of Central		United Faculty of Central records	"The United Faculty of Central (UFC) is a bargaining agent for faculty of Central Washington University. The union, founded in 1998, was among the first wave of university-level organizing in Washington state. Faculty members organized for higher wages, a faculty voice in campus affairs, and a presence in Olympia during legislative funding debates."																		
United Farm Workers	Q7887749	United Farm Workers records																			
United Workers Union-Independent		United Workers Union-Independent records	"Records of the Staff Rights Organizing Committee (SROC) and United Workers Union-Independent (UWU-I). SROC mobilized University of Washington staff to fight a discriminatory job reclassification that resulted in the first strike at the University of Washington in 1973. After the strike, members of the organizing committee formed their own union, United Workers Union-Independent. The union raised issues about the effects of racism and sexism on salaries that later became the concept of the Comparable Worth campaign. UWU-I's advocacy for the lowest-paid, unorganized women and people of color on campus prodded other campus unions to better represent these workers."																		
"Velasco, Victorio A., d. 1968"		Victorio A. Velasco papers	"After immigrating in the 1920s, Victorio Velasco became a participant and leader in many facets of Filipino-American life over the next half century. Velasco was perhaps best known as a leader of Seattle’s Filipino community. He published and edited the local

Velasco was born in Asingan, Pangasinan, The Philippines, ca. 1903. After graduating from high school he taught in Manila and worked as a reporter for the

After coming to the U.S., Velasco spent his summers working in the canneries alongside other Filipinos, who had begun filling most cannery positions after the loss of Japanese immigrants in the 1920s. Cannery work was known for being particularly strenuous and the employers often tried to take advantage of their Asian immigrant laborers, but the Filipinos developed a strong union to engage in collective bargaining with the employers. The Seattle branch of the Cannery Workers’ and Farm Laborers’ Union was organized in 1933 and represented Filipino-American cannery workers. However, the Filipino workers became frustrated with the AFL because of its stand on racial issues and in 1937 affiliated themselves with the CIO’s United Cannery, Agricultural, Packinghouse and Allied Workers of America, Local 7.

With union representation, the cannery workers were able to win concessions and improve wages and working conditions, but Local 7’s internal politics were often bitter. Many of the union elections featured personal insults and redbaiting. Velasco was involved in many of the elections both as a candidate and as a supporter of others running for office, but until the late 1940s, his attempts at winning a union office were unsuccessful. Velasco also was involved in a major split in Local 7 during the immediate postwar period. Many Local 7 members accused officers of corruption, which led to an investigation by its international union, which suspended or expelled three of Local 7’s top officers. These ousted officers formed a rival organization, the Seafood Workers’ Union (SFWU) and conducted a membership drive to try to displace Local 7. Although Velasco was not implicated in the Local 7 investigation, he joined the SFWU and became its secretary. There are a number of possibilities for why he might have joined.

One factor might have been the persistent regionalism within the Filipino-American community. Many of the people who joined the SFWU were from Velasco’s region of the Philippines. Ideology and politics may also have been a factor in Velasco’s decision, as members of the SFWU used anti-Communist rhetoric to attack Local 7. Velasco’s politics were consistently conservative and he saw Communism as a grave threat.

After merging with the AFL Alaska Fish Cannery Workers’ Union, the SFWU was able to enter a NLRB election that would allow cannery workers to determine which union would represent them. Redbaiting became a weapon in the campaign against Local 7, which affiliated with the International Longshoremen’s and Warehousemen’s Union (ILWU). In 1950 the ILWU finally won collective bargaining rights and subsequently became Local 37 of the ILWU. Velasco then joined Local 37 and remained a member for the rest of his life, serving frequently as a delegate and as secretary-treasurer.

Newspaper publishing was also a large component of Velasco’s life. In the early 1920s Velasco worked as editor for the

Throughout his life in Seattle Velasco was heavily involved in local civic organizations, mostly within the Filipino community. In 1928 he was part of a group of UW Filipino students who founded the Seattle Filipino Clubhouse Fund. The Fund was intended to raise enough money to build a center for Filipino students at the university, but the plans never materialized. However, Velasco later changed the organization’s name to Filipino Community of Seattle, Inc., and set out to build a center for the entire Seattle Filipino community. Decades later, in 1965, the center was finally completed and was open for social events and recreation. Velasco also was a founder, president, and board member of the UW Filipino Alumni Association after World War II and founded both the Pangasinan Association of the Pacific Northwest and the Asinganian Club, which were comprised of people who came from his region of the Philippines.

Velasco also served other civic organizations that were not targeted specifically at Filipinos. Many of these groups were trying to reach out to the city’s and state’s diverse groups to try to improve race relations. He helped found the Jackson Street Community Council in 1946 and served as its first secretary and then as a board member. Other community organizations that Velasco served include the King County Advisory Council of the Washington State Board Against Discrimination, and the Board of Trustees of the Neighborhood House, which served inner-city youth.

Velasco died in Waterfall Alaska in 1968. He had been working at a cannery there when the bunkhouse caught on fire. After escaping safely, Velasco went back to retrieve his typewriter but was unable to escape a second time."																		
Washington Women in Trades Association		Washington Women in Trades Association records	The Washington Women in Trades Association was founded in 1978 by and for women working in the skilled trades to gather and share information.																		
United Association of Journeymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipe Fitting Industry. Washington State Association		Washington State Association of the U.A. Plumbers and Pipefitters records	"Washington State Association of U.A Plumbers and Pipefitters (WSA) was founded in 1921 to promote cooperation of all plumber and pipefitters local unions in the State of Washington so they may protect each local union member from ""unjust and injurious competition.""

In 1995, the WSA established an organizing department funded by all working members of the WSA to address lost market share and union density, and is one of the earliest statewide organizing systems in the United States. The WSA coordinates and funds organizing activities in area U.A. Plumbers & Pipefitters locals and works to prevent the open shop. The WSA has signed nearly 200 contractors since it started and has organized over 1,000 new members. The WSA is active legislatively and politically, coordinating political action of local unions and their members at both the local and national level.

As of 2013, the WSA had 7,324 members belonging to six local unions, all of which are United Association affiliates. The association's affilates are: UA Local 26- Western Washington Plumbers and Steamfitters; UA Local 32- Seattle Plumbers and Steamfitters; UA Local 44- Spokane Plumbers and Steamfitters; UA Local 598- Pasco Plumbers and Steamfitters; UA Local 669- Road Sprinklerfitters; UA Local 699- Seattle Sprinklerfitters"																		
(No origination name found.)		World Trade Organization 1999 Seattle Ministerial Conference Protest collection																			
Washington Committee for Occupational Safety and Health		Washington Committee for Occupational Safety and Health collection	"Washington Committee for Occupational Safety and Health (WashCOSH) was founded in 1992 at a meeting of union and safety and health activists at the International Association of Machinists, Lodge 751 union hall. The goal was to improve workplace safety and health. Funding came from subcontracting on grants to the American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees and the Alice Hamilton Committee for Safety and Health from the National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences.

WashCOSH was involved in various projects over its history, including Ergonomics at a Buffalo Industries fabric recycling plant organized by Teamsters. The organization also offered a program of Painting Hazards Certification Training and other ""painters' upgrade classes"" for the Painters Advanced Training Institute at the Duwamish Branch of South Seattle Community College. Other trainings included Confined Space Entry Training and Hazardous Materials Emergency Response Training for the American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees. As well, the organization was involved with annual Workers' Memorial Day Events. WashCOSH published a quarterly newsletter, a guide called ""Pollution Prevention for Construction Painting: A guide to help protect painters, the public and the environment"" and organized an annual conferences including ""Ergonomics, Safety, and Health in Construction, September 12-13, 1994"" and ""A Labor Union Response to Violence in the Workplace, June 10th, 1995""

WashCOSH created a multi-organizational governance committee, the WISHA Workplace Violence Committee. The executive board was made up of representatives from many unions, including Diane Zahn from the United Food and Commercial Workers (the first board president); Bill Anderson of the International Union of Painters and Allied Trades (Board President); Roger Yockey of United Food and Commercial Workers; and Jay Herzmark (Trustee, Board President) of AFSCME. Other unions represented on the board included International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers and the Office and Professional Employees International Union.

The first employee of WashCOSH was Anna Bachmann, who was hired as the Training Director in April 1993. She was later joined by Mark Catlin in the summer of 1993, who was the Director/Industrial Hygienist. Jay Herzmark replaced Catlin at the beginning of 1998. WashCOSH went out of business in the summer of 1998 because of tax issues."																		
Washington Education Association	Q55137705	Washington Education Association records																			
Washington State Council of Fire Fighters		Washington State Council of Fire Fighters records	"The Washington State Council of Fire Fighters (WSCFF) was founded on September 1, 1939, and represents 130 affiliated local fire fighter unions and more than 6900 affiliated members of the International Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF) within the state. The WSCFF’s mission is to provide the best possible working conditions, the safest work environment, and the fairest wages and benefits to fulfill the needs of the men and women in this profession. The council is active on local and national fronts with regard to issues that affect its members. The WSCFF administers several major programs in addition to political action. Education is provided through regional classes and one comprehensive educational seminar per year. An annual Convention is held to elect officers and determine policy and direction of the WSCFF. Legal assistance is provided through direct response financial loans or retention of counsel. Representation is provided when needed and requested for contract negotiations, mediation, interest arbitration, grievance arbitration, and other matters.

The WSCFF’s Board of Directors is made up of its executive officers and an elected representative from 11 geographic regions (WSCFF districts across the state). Since WSCFF and legislative districts are not the same, there is some overlap whereby WSCFF board members represent multiple legislative districts. The WSCFF is affiliated with the International Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF), American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO), Washington State Labor Council (WSLC) and Canadian Labor Congress (CLC). (Source; WSCFF website www.wscff.org)"																		
Washington State Federation of Teachers		Washington State Federation of Teachers records	"The Washington State Federation of Teachers was formed in the mid-1930s when several American Federation of Teachers local union affiliates joined together and formed the Washington Joint Council of Teachers, soon reorganized as the WSFT. The Federation and its affiliates organized K-12 teachers throughout the state, but had the most success in western Washington, with a collective bargaining agreement in Bremerton public schools in the late 1930s and strength in secondary schools elsewhere. Later the union organized successfully among community college faculty. By the 1980s most K-12 teacher organizing had been abandoned in the face of successful collective bargaining by National Education Organization affiliates. Today (2016) the organization represents pre-K through 12 classified staff, and professional staff in community and technical colleges. The organization's name was changed to Washington Federation of Teachers in the 1980s, and to AFT Washington in the 2000s."																		
Washington State Nurses Association	Q7972262	Washington State Nurses Association records	"The Washington State Nurses Association was established in 1908 as the Washington State Graduate Nurses Association. It was organized by representative from five county nurses' organizations, and its original character was that of a professional organization. Much of its early activity involved establishing a system of registration and professional licensing for nurses. The organization changed its name for Washington State Nurses Association (WSNA) in 1940. The WSNA continues to be an organization limited to registered nurses, and has been affiliated with American Nurses' Association since it was founded. In 1948 the organization established an Economic Security Program to pursue collective bargaining; its first collective bargaining contract was with the Boeing Company in 1949. By the 1960s, the WSNA considered itself as much a labor union as a professional organization, and represented registered nurses in hospitals around the state as well as in industry. The organization continued to be active in supporting Washington State legislation defining the scope responsibilities and standards relating to nurses' work, and fought for collective bargaining rights for health care and public employees. In the 1980s the WSNA faced a challenge when nurses at Group Health Cooperative decertified the organization as their bargaining agent, formed an independent union, and soon affililated with District 1199, an independent union that later affiliated with the Service Employees International Union. A similar pattern emerged at other workplaces, and by 1990 almost half the WSNA bargaining units had been lost to other organizations by. Since the 1990s the two unions have agreed not to raid each other. The WSNA joined United American Nurses in 2000, and thus gained affiliation with the AFL-CIO. Later leaving to join the short-lived National Federation of Nursing, the WSNA stayed with that organization when it folded into the American Federation of Teachers in 2013, and continues to be affiliated with the American Nurses' Association as well."																		
"Weiss, Joan (Labor activist)"		Joan Weiss papers	"Joan Weiss is a labor activist, union member, and union leader. Weiss worked for the M.L. King County Labor Council Worker's Center before the program was ended. Weiss was also a member and business agent for the Classified Staff Association 925 at the University of Washington. That local union is now part of Service Employees International Union, Local 925."																		
"Wells, Burt D."		Burt D. Wells papers	"Burt D. Wells was President of the International Brotherhood of Pulp, Sulphite and Paper Mill Workers (IBPS&PMW) Local 242 in Portland, Oregon. Wells also served as Secretary-Treasurer of the Rank and File Movement for Democratic Action in the late 1950s-early 1960s, a committee formed by members of IBPS&PMW locals in protest of decisions made by the International leadership, including the dismissal of Research and Education Director, George Brooks in 1961. These and similar efforts within paper worker unions across the U.S. and Canada resulted in the establishment of rebel union, the Association of Western Pulp and Paper Workers in 1964 where many dissatisfied members of the IBPS&PMW and United Papermakers and Paperworkers relocated themselves."																		
"Whitman, Frank"		Frank Whitman collection on Inlandboatmen’s Union of the Pacific strike against Crowley Maritime Corporation	Frank Whitman is a retired Inlandboatmen's Union of the Pacific member.																		
"Wiley, Barbara (Barbara Beth), 1967-"		Barb Wiley papers	"Barb Wiley is a childcare worker and an organizer in the Seattle Worthy Wage campaign. She served on the Seattle Worthy Wages Task Force steering committee from the time of its start (1990). The Worthy Wage Task Force was coordinated by the National Center for the Early Childhood Work Force. until 1999. The national campaign, originally intended to last five years, was initiated to draw attention to the importance of child care work and the urgent need to improve compensation and training for child care workers. The campaign was highly successful in creating a network of individuals, advocates, parents. The locally-based campaigns such as the Seattle Worthy Wages Task Force provided resources and technical support, offered leadership training opportunities, and organized an annual retreat. Funding was obtained primarily through grants. Barb Wiley served as principal contact for many of these grants."																		
Working Washington		Working Washington ephemera collection	"Working Washington is a coalition of unions, faith, and grassroots community groups--an outgrowth of Service Employees International Union Local 775--that seeks to unite working people to fight for a fair economy. They were the organization that organized the campaign of fast food strikes that sparked the fight for the $15 minimum wage in Seattle and helped lead the successful campaign to pass a $15 minimum wage in SeaTac."																		
"Workmen's Circle/Arbeter Ring. Branch No. 304 (Seattle, Wash.)"		Workmen's Circle/Der Arbeter Ring Branch 304 records	"In April of 1892, a group of Jewish garment workers from New York City's Lower East Side formed a mutual aid society called the Workingmen’s Circle. This small collective soon grew to a membership of 300, and it officially became known as the Workmen’s Circle (Der Arbeter Ring in Yiddish) in 1900. The Workmen’s Circle provided benefits that poor immigrants were otherwise denied: life insurance, health benefits, unemployment relief, homes for the aged, and funeral assistance. By 1920 there were over 80,000 members, and The Workmen’s Circle had become one of the largest Jewish organizations in America.

The programs initiated by the Workmen's Circle encompassed a host of social, cultural, and political issues deemed important to the Jewish community. In addition to promoting labor rights and the strengthening of trade unions, the organization provided educational and cultural programs that emphasized Jewish heritage through theater, music, literature, summer camps, and Yiddish instruction. The Workmen's Circle also sold war bonds to provide support during both World Wars, and partnered with other Jewish organizations to actively promote and fund the settlement and expansion of Israel during the early years of its existence. After World War II, the organization de-emphasized their socialist leanings in an effort to distance themselves from communist affiliation.

The Seattle, Washington branch of the Workmen's Circle -- Branch 304 -- was organized in 1909, and their first location was a rented store on 14th Avenue and Main Street. In 1920, the members bought a building at 120 21st Avenue that had previously been a blacksmith shop. Property was then purchased for the organization at 1614 East Union Street in 1937, with the grand opening of this location taking place in December 1942. Activities in Seattle included summer picnics, festive observances of Jewish holidays, New Years Eve celebrations, banquets, and lectures. Though Branch 304 eventually closed its doors in 1973, the Workmen's Circle organization continues to operate in several cities across the country."																		
"Yockey, Roger"		Roger Yockey papers	"Roger Yockey is a journalist and a retired union representative and community oganizer. Yockey was a communications officer for United Food and Commerical Workers Local during the 1989 strike. Author of: ""The right of privacy and the right to report the news, 1965; ""I never stopped believing"", c2007. ""People are # 1"" c2010."																		
Karl Yoneda	Q6372386	Karl G. Yoneda papers	"Karl Gozo Yoneda (July 15, 1906 - May 9, 1999) was a Japanese American labor activist and union organizer. He was prominent in the 1930s with helping workers unionize in California and Washington, helping to organize and participate in the 1934 Pacific Coast Maritime Strike in San Francisco. After he and his family were interned at Manzanar, he went on to serve in World War II as a Japanese language specialist for the U.S. Army. His later years were spent opposing the Vietnam War and nuclear proliferation as well as serving with other socially progressive causes."																		
